Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



<». 



DISSERTATION 



ON THE 



G I P S E Y S 



9 



. AIPRESSNTING TREIB 

MANNER OF LIFE, SICKNESS, DEATH, ^ BURIAL, 

FAMILY ECONOMY, RELIGION, 

OCCUPATIONS 4: TRADES, LANGUAGE, 

MARRIAGES ij^EDUCATION, SCIENCES «J- ARTS, ^cl ^c. <f c. 



WltH 

AN HISTORICAL ENQUIRY 

CONCERNING THEIft 

ORIGIN 4- FIRST APPEARANCE IN EUROPE. 






FBOU THE &ESMAK OF 

H. M. G. GRELLMANN. 






LONDON : X^/; VvT^^^^ 



rtlNTPEJ) BY WILLIAM BALLINTINE, 

Drake-street, Adelphi, Strand: 

SOLD BY EFFINGHAM WILSON, 
OTPifOSITE THE CHAPTER* COFFEE-HOUSE, ST. PAUL's. 

180?! 






\ 



/ 



ADVERTISEMENT. 



The following Dissertation has already ap- 
peared in an English dress, having been, 
some years since, translated by the late 
M. Raper, Esq. F.R.S. and A. S. for the pur- 
pose, as he states in his preface, of affording 
" such of his countrymen as were unacquainted 
" with the German language an opportunity 
" of learning from what part of the world it is 
" probable the Gipsej^s came among us/' 
The original work, and Mr. Raper s translation, 
are burthened with many notes — Greek, Latin, 
French, German, English — shewing the sources 
whence the information was derived, most of 
which, for obvious reasons, are . omitted in ' 
the present edition ; such only being retained 
as were thought indispensable, or particularly 
interesting. 

Jidyy 1807. 



; •■ 



4 



CONTENTS. 



Introduction 



P. i 



SECTION THE FIRST. 

DESCRIPTION' OF THE OIPSEYS, THEIR MANNER OF UFEr 

THEIR CUSTOMS, AND PROPERTIES. 

CHAPTER I. 

Page 

Various Appellations of these People 1 , 

CHAPTER II. 

On the Diversion of the Gipseys, nnd their Num- 
bers in Europe ...'•...•..» 3 

CHAPTER III. 

The Properties of their Bodies . ; . . . • . . 10 

CHAPTER IV. 

On their Food and Beverage . • .^-^ '• . . • 15 

CHAPTCB y. 

On ihe Dress of the Gipseys .25 



CONTENTS.- 



CHAPTER VI. 

Page 

On the Family Economy of the Gipseys 31 



^ ' / 



CHAPTER VII. 

Their Occupations and Trades 58 

CHAPTER VIII. 

y On th^r Marriages and Education 6l 

CHAPTER IX. 

^ On their Sickness, Death, and Burial 68 

CHAPTER X. 

s/ Political Regulations peculiar to the Gipseys • . . 72 

CHAPTER XI. 

^ On the Religion of the Gipseys 79 

CHAPTER XII. 

Their Language, Sciences, and Arts 83 

CHAPTER XIII. 

Character and Capacities of the Gipseys; whether 
they are an Advantage or a Detriment to States, 8y 

CHAPTER XIV. 

Concerning the Toleration of the Gipseys by the dif- 
ferent States of Europe 93 

CHAPtER XV. 

Essay on the Improvement of the Gipseys . • . .102 



CONTENTS. 



SECTION THE SECOND. 



ON THE ORIGIN OF THE GIPSEYS. 



CHAPTER I. 

y The first Appearance of Gipseys in Europe • . . . 109 

CHAPTER II. 

On the Sanctity, Passports, and Difference of the for» 

mer from the latter Gipseys • . . • • « .. 117 

CHAPTER III. 

y Presumed Origin of the Gipseys • ■ . . . • .• • 137 

CHAPTER IV. 

y On the Egyptian Descent of the Gipseys .... 147 

CHAPTER V. 

> The Gipseys come from Hindostan 170 

CHAPTER VI. 

y The Gipseys are of the Caste called Suders . . .199 



Supplement , 209 



I 



r 



. % 



INTRODUCTION. 



1 HE Gipseys are a. singular phenomenon in Europe; 
whether we contemplate their habitations, attend 
at their meals, or merely look in their faces, they 
always appear particular, and we are each moment 
struck with something new and extraordinary. 

What appears most worthy of remark is, that 
neither time, climate^ nor example, has, in gene- 
ral, hitherto, made any alteration. For the space 
of between three and four hundred years, they have 
gone wandering about,, like pilgrims and strangers: 
they are found in eastern and western countries, 
as well arhoiig the rude as civilised^ the indo- 
lent as active, people : yet ' they remain ever, and 
in all places, what their fathers were — Gipseys. 
Africa makes them no blacker^ nor Europe whiter: 
they neither learn to be lazy in Spain, nor diligent 
in Germany : in Turkey, Mahoipet, and among 
Christians, Christ, remairl equally without adora- 
tion. Around, on every side, they see fixed dwell- 
ings, with settled inhabitants ; they, nevertheless, 
proceed in their own Way, and continue, for the 
most part, unsocial wandering robbers; 

When we search for similar cases, among all the 
diffeient people who have, quitted their mother 



11 



countryi and inhabited a foreign one, we do not 
meet with a single instance that exactly agrees 
with that of the Gipseys. History certainly does re- 
cord accounts of people that have migrated, and 
remained the same in a strange country ; but then 
this constancy has been on account of religion, 
cither permitted by the regents, or maintained by 
their victorious arms : though this last circumstance 
has existed much less frequently than might be 
imagined. Many instances have occurred in Which, 
the people subdued being more enlightened than 
their conquerors, the latter have adopted the 
manners of the former. The Romans became Greeks 
on the conquest of* Greece; and the Franks as- 
sumed the manners of the Gauls when in possession 
of their country: the Mantcheous vanquished the 
Chinese ; but Chinese customs prevailed over those 
of the Mantcheous. How, then, does it happen 
that the Gipseys, who never either established their 
manners and customs by force, or obtained any 
toleration from governments under which they 
lived, remain unchanged, and resemble each other 
exactly, in every place ? There are two causes, to 
which this coincidence is principally owing : one is 
the place whence they originate, with their conse- 
quent mode of thinking ; the other aiises from the 
circumstances which have hitherto attended theit. 
situation. 
The Gipseys are unquestionably of eastern origin, 



HI 



änd have eastern notions« There is a principte in* 
berent in uncivilised people, particularly those of 
Oriental countries, which occasions them to be 
strongly attached to their own habits: hence 
every custom, every conception, which has once 
been current among them, be it ever so pernicious 
or ridiculous, is invariably preserved ; or any affec- 
tion which has once predominated in their minds, v 
retains its dominion even for ages. Innovations do 
not easily succeed with people living in a state bor- 
dering on that of nature ; the least deviation from 
custom is observed, and often resented with impe* 
tuosity. For any new thing to take root it must 
cither be introduced by cunning and force, or be 
attended with the most favourable circumstances« 
TWs latter was the case with Christianity. Provid-. 
ence had called Greeks and Romans into the east^ 
and, by innumerable vicissitudes, had rendered that 
country ripe for furthet instruction : then came the 
great Sower-— Christ scattered the seed, and it 
prospered. Mahomet, on the contrary, before he 
became strong enough to enforce conviction with 
the sword, brought about his purpose by art: 
knowing that the weak side of his countryipen 
was their veneration for every thing handed down 
from their forefathers, he gave his new religion the 
colouring of antiquity. '•" 

Mahomet says, " We have swerved from the 
** religion of our fouQd^sr ^hrial^am, affd have in* 

bS 



IV 



*^ troduccd novelties among us. Abraham wor- 
" shipped only one God; we have many Gods. 
" I am sent to retrench these novelties, and to 
"bring you back to the religion of your fore- 
" fathers." This was the first ground on which 
he went. When the Ishmaelite would not ac- 
quiesce in the charge of having fallen off from 
Abraham's religion, Mahomet proceeded : " Ye 
** are illiterate people ; ye have no books : the 
** inhabitants of the neighbouring countries have 
" books, which contain the religion of Abraham." 
The Arabians applied to the Jevts and Christians, 
for information on this head; and as the event 
turned in favour of the pretended prophet, they 
yielded without contradiction. Mahomet pro^ 
ceeded in teaching, and again appealed to the 
people with books: the Arabians, too, continued 
asking questions, being more tractable whenever 
his assertions were confirmed ; but when the con- 
trary happened, a dispute arose, in which the 
prophet could only get the better by defending 
the antiquity of his madness at the expence of 
truth, accusing both the Jews and Christians with 
having falsified their books. 

The same means that helped Mahomet with 
the Arabians, have been^ in latter times, very 
serviceable to the Jesuits, in China. How would 
these cunning fathers have obtained admission 
for their religion among the' Chinese, had, they 



not referred to Confucius, in aid of their doctriues ? 
These are only instances of changes in religion ; 
but the case is precisely the same in other things. 
In the eastern nations, no improvement is adopted, 
be it of what kind it may, merely because it is 
an improvement, The Chinese are acquainted 
with the use of glas3; yet their mirrors are always 
ipade of metal, and their windows of oyster-shells. 
Mechanical watches have been for ages used at 
the court of Pekin ; but the bulk of the nation 
depend upon fire and water *. 

It is evident from the above, that the Gipscys, 
by reason of their eastern origin, and consequent 
way of thinking, are not easily made to change 
their principles and habits. When we further 
consider the circumstances under which these 
people have hitherto existed, we want nothing 
more to make us comprehend why they have 
remained, to the present time, what they were at 
their first arrival in, Europe. 

Figure to yourself a person, in whom custom^ 
and deep-rooted affections, are the only, and at 
the same time strong, impulses to action; in whose 
soul no new unwonted thoughts arise, in con- 
sequence of his own reflections, nor find easy 

• The instruments used by the Chinese for marking tipie, act 
cither by fire or water. Those that act by water, somewhat 
resemble our large hour-glasses : those by fire, are composed «f 
tweet smelling powder, made up into a sort of match, 



4 

VI 



adlnittaiice when proposed by others :— leave this 
man entirely to himself; do not permit any of 
those means to be used which are requisite to give 
a new turn to his ideas, and deep-rooted preju- 
dices : — ^he must necessarily remain the same ; and 
his latest posterity will continue like him : this is 
exactly the case with the Gipseys. Unused to 
reflect, fettered by habits, they arrived in our 
quarter of the globe. No state has, hitherto, 
done any thing for the express purpose of in- 
structing or reforming them ; except the Empress 
Theresa,' by her regulations, which were never 
put in execution. On their first arrival, they 
procured passports, and free quarters, by their 
holy lies. They dispersed^ begged, deceived the 
common people, by fortune telling : they stole : 
and for a long time no attention was paid to them. 
At last the evil grew too enormous ; the complaints 
against them became so loud, that government 
was constrained to take official notice of them. 
Exemplary punishments were vjudged necessary : 
hanging and beheading were not sufficiently effica- 
cious; aiid it was then thought expedient to 
banish them ; — a proceeding more likely to render 
them worse than better, and even in other re- 
spects liable to many objections ; still the custom 
has prevailed, down to the latest times. The 
neighbour, to whom these unpolished guests were 
sent, sooner or later, followed the same method 



of di^ngaging the evil, tHl, in the end, they were 
persecuted byalttiost all kingdoms atid govenünentff: 
Many states afterwards relaxing in their severity^ 
the Gipseys were suffered to creep in, a few at a 
time, and were permitted to remain quiet: yet 
every one of them stood in fear, innocent or 
guilty, lest he might be taken unawares, merely 
because he was Gipsey, and delivered over to the 
executioner. They had been accustonhec^ in their 
own country, to^ live remote from cities and 
towns: now they became still more uniformly 
inhabitants of the forests, and outcasts; as, inf 
consequence of the search which was mad^ after 
them, or at least threatened to be ma;de, they 
judged themselves to be more secure in deserts 
and concealment, than they would have been 
if frequenting places of established abode, and 
having free intercourse with the civilised inhabit- 
ants: whereby they were divested of the most, 
perhaps only, probable means of inducing thenr 
to change their mapers. And yet, had they not 
sequestered themselves from other people, or had 
they been more inclined to mix in society, it is 
not likely, without some direct interference of 
government, that they would have been rendered 
better. There were two great obstacles to be sur- 
mounted :~first, by mere intercourse, it would 
have been, generally speaking, difficult to eradi- 
cate the prejudices and customs frpm their Oriental 



vm 



minds: secondly, being Gipseys, people would 
not willingly have established any correspondence 
with them. Let us reflect how different they are 
from Europeans : the one is white, the other 
J)lac k ;-r-this clothes himself, the other goes half 
naked; — this shudders at the thought of eating 
carrion, . the other regales on it as a dainty^ 
Moreover these people are famed, and were even 
from their first appearance in Europe, for being 
plunderers, thieves, and incendiaries : the European, 
in consequence, not merely dislikes, but hates 
them. For the reasons above stated, the Gipseys 
have been, at different periods, driven from all 
the countries of Europe; and only a few simple 
people occasionally made a nearer acquaintance, 
in order to consult them on matters of superstition. 
Such is the state of what has been done, and 
attempted, for the improvement of the Gipseys; 
whereas, so soon as it was discovered that they 
were strangers, who thought of nothing less than 
of returnmg into their own country, if any plan 
had been acted upon for their reformation, and 
only half the wise regulations left behind by the 
Empress Theresa in her states for the management 
of these people been adopted, and duly enforced, 
they would long ago have been divested of the 
rude nature of their ancestors, and have ceased to 
be the uncultivated branches of a wild stock. On 
the contrary, having always been either left to thenir. 



IX 



selves or persecuted, it could not be otherWise, 
but that they must remain for ever, and in all 
places, the same. 

Perhaps it is reserved for our age, in which so 
much • has been attempted for the benefit of 
mankind, to humanise a people who, for centuries, 
have wandered in error and neglect: and it 
may be hoped, that while we are endeavouring 
to ameliorate the condition of our African brethren, 
the civilisation of the Gipseys, who form so large 
a portion of humanity, will not be overlooked. 
It cannot be denied, that, considering the multi- 
tude of them, their reform must be an object of 
very serious consideration to many states. Sup- 
pose, according to a rough estimate, that the Gipseys 
in Hungary and Transylvania, including the Banat, 
amount to upwards of one hundred thousand; 
Mrhat a difference would it not make, in those 
countries, if one hundred thousand inhabitants, 
mostly loungers, beggars, cheats,, and thieves, 
who now reap where they have not sown, con- 
suming the fruits of others' labour, were to become 
industrious useful subjects! Their reformation 
would be a difficult task, as the attempts made by 
the Empress Theresa evinced : — a boy (for you 
must begin with qhildren, and not meddle with the 
old stock, on whom no effi3rts will have effect) 
would frequently seem in the most promising train 
tp civilisation ; on a Siudden his wild nature WQqld , 



Bp^T, a relftpsc follow, and he became* a perfect 
Gipsey a^in. But the measure is not, therefore, 
impossible : Was not the case precisely the same 
with the Saxons, whom Charles the Great con- 
verted tp Christianity ? Let the state resolving to 
appropriate the Gipsey tribe only persevere in its 
endeavours; some effect will be gained on the 
second generation, and with the third or fouirth, 
the end will certainly be accomplished. 

By an attentive observation, we may perceive 
. that the Gipseys arc endued with very good capa-^ 
cities, which promise to make a profitable return, 
for much trouble bestowed upon them. In the 
first Section one attempt, made on this speculation, 
is produced, and it is hoped it will be found 
«uflSciently complete, to exhibit the leading features 
of their character. 

The origin of the Gipseys has remained a perfect 
philosopher's stone till a late period. For more 
than two hundred years, people have been anxious 
tp discover who these guests were, that, under the 
name of Gipseys, came, unknown and uninvited, 
into Europe, in the fifteenth century, and have 
chosen to remain here ever since. No enquirer 
tver broached an opinion that met with his suc- 
cessor's approbation ; a fourth scarcely heard what 
a third had said, before, he passed sentence and 
advanced something new. We have no reason to 
wonder at the miscarriage of these enquiries, which 



XI 

were neither more nor less than a collection of con-* 
jectures founded on imaginary prodfs and partial 
speculation. — ^An author set to work, to discover a 
country whence the Gipseys came, or a people to 
whom they could belong ; he found out a place 
which had been named, for instance, Zeugitana, 
or a people who bore some faint resemblance to 
the Gipseys. As one coal lights another, so these 
two siimilarities became perfectly applicable to the 
people whose ■ origin he was seeking; he stopped 
here, and published his discovery, 
^ Several investigators laid their foundation on 
hearsay, and unauthenticated evidence ; they then 
endeavoured to assist fliis testimony by modelling 
the extraneous circumstances which could not be 
passed over, in order to make them coincide ; if, 
notwithstanding all this, difficulties still occurred, 
they borrowed Alexander^« sword, and cut the 
knot which no milder means could undo. 

That this has been the mode of proceeding hi- 
therto, will be frequently proved in the course of the 
work. Even had the imafgination not magnified any 
thing, lior modelled circumstances agreeably to its 
own fancy, yet the following, which is taken for 
granted, " that two people resembling each other in 
" one or two particulars^ muM be descended from the 
" same stocky"* is an over-hasty conclusion. In the 
first place, reject that the most different nations 



XU 



may agree in some points; further, make the allow- 
ance for various parts of the world producing inha- 
bitants of similar shape and colour ; — What, then, 
remains to prove that the Gipseys are descended 
from any one of the people from whom they have 
been traced ? 

There are no records, or historical sources, lead- 
ing to a direct discovery of the origin of the Gip- 
seys ; those which have been thought so, are not 
genuine. Nothing, therefore, remains, but to 
seek the truth, through circuitous tracks ; by this 
means, it may certainly be found. A man must not 
go to tombstones, recently erected, in German 
church-yards, nor adduce a single custom, or the 
name of a country bearing a resemblance to that of 
Gipsey, as grounds of proof: and, on the other 
hand, overlook a hundred difficulties, or even posir 
tive contradictions. But if the language, oj the Gip- 

'' seySy fheir name^ the conformation of their bodies 
and minds, their customs and religious principles^ 
mark a country where it is possible Jor them to have 
been indigenous ; when History a^d Chronology cor- 
• roborate the supposition, and there is not any other 
country in the world to which the Gipseys^ all these 

^ particulars taken together, could belong ; ^ then the 
country, where these circumstances meetj must, in 
all probability, be their true mother country. 
Whether their Hindostan origin has so much i^ 



XIU 



its favour, is more than we dare venture to affirm ; 
as it is very possible for the judgment to be so de- 
cfeived, that we may believe what does not, in fact, 
exist. However, on perusing the subseijuent pages, 
our readers will judge if, like our predecessors, wc 
have erred, or have discovered the truth. 



DISSEETATION 



ON THE 



G I F S E Y S< 



SECTION I. 



RIPTION OF THE GIPSByS, THEIB MAJJNER OF LUTE 
THEIR CUSTOMS AND PROPERTIES. 



CHAPTER I. 

' Various Appellations of these People. 

is not uncommon for the same people to be 
)d by different names, in different nations; 
I is the case with the Gipseys, The French 
ived their first accounts of them from Bohe- 
; which occasioned their giving them the 
ic of Bohemians (Bohimiens): the Dutch, 
>osing they came from Egypt, (^lled them Hea- 
ts (Hey dens). In Denmark, Sweden, and some 
s of Germany, Tartars were thought of: the 
3rs and Arabians, perceiving the propensity 
Gipseys have to thieving, adopted the name 



2 

Charami (robbers) for them. In Hungary, thdy 
were formerly called Pharaohites (Pharaoh nepeky 
Pharaoh's people) ; and the vulgar, in Transylvania, 
continue that name for them. The English do not 
differ much from these laXter (calling them Egypt- 
ians-— Gipseys) ; any more than the Portuguese and 
Spaniards (Gitanos). The Clementines, in Smyrnia, 
use the appellation Madjub ; and the inhabitants 
of the lesser Bucharia, that of Diajii. The name 
. of Zigeuner has obtained the most general adoption : 
the Gipseys are so called hot only in all Germany, 
Italy, and Hungary (Tzigany)y but frequently iti 
Transylvania, Wallachia, and Moldavia (Cyganis)* 
Moreover the Turks, and other eastern nations, 
have no other than this name for them (Tschin-^ 
genLs) ; and perhaps the befqre-cited Diajii of the 
Buchanans may be the very same. It has been 
said, they call themselves Moors; but that is false; 
Moor is only an adjunct, not the name of any 
people : it is really a pity, since this name would 
have been so fair a pretence to make Amorites of 
them, as some writers have done! It is not by 
any means proved, that the modern Greeks called 
them Atkingans ; this opinion is supported more 
by the arbitrary assertions of some learned men, 
than by real facts : which is also the case with the 
rest of the catalogue of names that have been 
dispersed^ in various treatises on the origin of the 
Gipseys ; as will be hereafter demonstrated. 



» c 



CHAPTER II. 

On the Dispersion of the Gipseys^ and their Numbers 

, in Eu7vpe. 

The numerous hordes of Gipseys, widely dis-» 
perscd over the face of the earth-, are incredible* 
They wander about in Asia; in the interior part 
of Africa, they plunder the merchants of Agades * ; "^ 
and, like locusts, have overrun mest of the coun- 
tries of Europe. America seems to be the only 
part of the world where they are not known ; no 
mention appearing to be made of them by authors 
who have written on that quarter of the globe. 
It would he superfluous to dilate on the history 
of those in Asia and Africa, as we have no minute 
accounts of them ; we shall therefore confine our- 
selves to those in Europe* 

There are but few countries, here, which are 
entirely free from Gipseys ; although, for centuries, 
every state has been endeavouring to rid itself of 
them. Under King Henry VIII, and in the reign 
of Queen Elizabeth, . they suffered a general per- 

* J^eo Africanus, in his Histoire Naturelle des Indes, SfC. p. 327, 
says of the merchants of Agades, that they kept great number» 
of armed slaves for their security, and mentions that their cara- 
vans — " sont tous vcx6z de divers pcuples du desert, comme de 
ceux qu'on appelle communement Bohemiehs, ou Egyptiens." 

C 



sccution in England: there are, nevertheless, 
great numbers still to be found there. About thirty 
years ago, they even threatened to set the town 
of Northampton on fire, because the magistrates 
had arrested some of their young people, whose 
release they solicited in vain : several of the ring- 
leaders were hanged : they had in the mean time 
shewn plainly, that their race was very far from 
being annihilated. It is not uncommon, in the 
county of Bedford particularly, to see them lying 
in byplaces, to the number of forty or fifty toge- 
tiier : but they are cautious how they travel about 
in companies, and are rarely seen in towns or 
villages but by one at a time. 

Spain, especially the southern provinces, con- 
tains so many of these people, that they rove 
about in large troops, threatening to plunder and 
murder travellers whom they happen to meet in 
lonely places : at a distance from the cities, and 
where no place of refuge is near, danger is always 
to be apprehended. Swinburne rates their num- 
ber very high ; he asserts, that the loss of the Gip- 
seys would immediately be perceived by the apparent 
diminution of population. No\y as Spain contains 
eleven millions- of people, how considerable a draft 
must there be to render it perceptible ! Twiss also 
mentions a great many, but sums up a determinate 
number, 40,000 ; which is certainly considerable, 
but probably twice twenty, or even twicp forty, 



5 

thousand too few ; — ^unless we charge Swinburne'^ 
and others, with having greatly exaggerated; — 
even admitting, that he means, to be understood 
as speaking of the southern provinces only. 

In France, before the revolution, there were 
but few, for the obvious reason, that every Gip^ey 
who could be apprehended, fell a sacrifice to the 
police. Lorrain and Alsatia were indeed excep- 
tions ; they being very numerous there, especially 
in the forests of Lorrain. Here they seem to have 
met with milder treatment ; yet, according to the 
assurances of a traveller, many of them were to be 
found in the gaols' of Lorrain. They increased the 
more in this district, in consequence of their having 
been very assiduously looked after, and driven from 
the dominions of a late Duke of Deuxponts, 
whither his successor would not suffer them to 
return* 

They were universally to be found in Italy, inso- 
much that even Sicily and Sardinia were not free. 
But they were most nurherous in the dominions of 
the church ; probably because there was the worsts 
police, with much superstition : by the former they 
were left undisturbed, and the latter enticed them 
to deceive the ignorant^ äs it afforded them an 
opportunity of obtaining a plentiful contribution^ 
by their fortune-telling, and enchanted amulets* 
There was a geneml law throughout Italy^ that 
no Gipsey should remain more than two nights \ 

c 2 



in any on^ place: by this regulation, it is true, 
no place retained its guest loiig ; but no sooner 
was one gone, than another came in his room : 
it was a continual circle, and quite as convenient 
to them as a perfect toleration would have 
been. Italy rather suffered than benefited by this 
Jaw ; as, by keeping these people in constant 
motion, the}^ would do more mischief there than 
in places where they were permitted to remain 
tktationary. 

They are very scarce in many parts of Germany ; 
äs well as in Swizerland and the Low-countries. 
A person may live many years in Upper Saxony, 
or in the districts of Hanover and Brunswic, with- 
out seeing a single Gipsey : when one happens to 
stray into a village, or town, he occasions as^ 
much disturbance as if the black gentleman with 
his cloven foot had appeared ; he frights children 
from their play, and draws the attention of the 
older people ; till the police officers get hold of him, 
and make him again invisible. In other provinces, 
on the contrary, particularly on the Rhine, a 
Gipsey is a very common sight. Some years ago 
there ' were such numbers of them in the dutchy 
of Wirtetnburg, that they seen lying about everj- 
where : but as, according to custom, they either 
lived by thieving, by fortune-telling or other 
tricks, plundering the illiterate people of their 
money, the government ordered detachments of 



^K>ldiers to drive them from their holes and lurking* 
places throughout the country ; and then trans- 
ported the congregated swarm, in the same 
manner as they were treated by the Duke of 
Deuxponts, as before related. 

In Poland and Lithuania, as well as in Cour- 
land, there is an amazing number of Gipseys. 
Their way vode in Courland is distinguished from V 
the principals of hordes in other countries; being 
not only very much respected by his own people, 
but, even by the Courland nobility, • is esteemed a 
man of hi^ rank, and is frequently to be met 
with at entertainments and card parties in the first 
femilies, where he is always a welcome gue^t. 
His dress is uncommonly rich, in comparison with 
Others of his tribe; generally silk in summer, and 
constantly velvet in winter. The common Gip- 
seys, on the contrary, are, in every particular, ex- 
actly like their brethren in other countries': even 
with regard to religion, they shew the same levity 
and indifierence ; — they suffer their children to be 
several times baptised ; now they profess them- 
selves to be Catholics, then Lutherans, and pre* 
sently after nothing at all, 

That they are to be found in Denmark, and 
Sweden, is certain, but how numerous they ara 
in those countries we cannot affirm; and therefore 
proceed to the south-east of Europe, 

The countries in this part seem to be th^ general 



-■> 



rendezvous of the Gipseys j their number amounts 
in Hungary^ according to a probable statement, 
to upwards of 50,000 ; and in the districts of the 
Banatj' Grisellini assures us, that when Count 
Clary occupied the situation of president, they, 
were reckoned at 5500; yet they appear to be 
atill more numerous in Transylvania. It. is not 
only Mr. Benko, a Gecman writer, who says they 
swarm upon the land like locusts, but we have 
^Iso certain calculation, wherein their numbers are 
estimated at between 35 and 36,000, 

Cantemir says, the Gipsieys are dispersed all 
over Moldavia, where every baron has several 
families of them subject to him : in Wallachia, 
and the Sclavonian countries, they are quite as 
numerous, In Wallachia and Moldavia they are 
divided into two classjes — the princely, and bo- 
jarish: the former, according to Sulzer, amounts^ 
to many thousands; but that is trifling, in com-^ 
parison with the latter, as there is not a single 
bojar in Wallachia who has not at least three or 
four of them for slaves ; the rich have often some 
hundreds each, under tJheir command. 

Bessarabia, all Tartary, Bulgaria, Greece, and 
Romania, swarm with them ; even in Constan- 
tinople they are innumerM^le. In Romania, a 
large tract of Mount Hgpmus, which they inhabit, 
has acquired from them the name Tschenghe Valkan 
(Gjpsey Mountain), This district extends from. 



9 

the city Aydos, quite to Philippopolis, and coo- 
tains more Gipseys than any other province in the 
Turkish empire. 

From what has been advanced, the reader 
will be enabled to form some conception, how con- 
siderable a class of people the Gipseys are in 
Europe ; independent of their numbers in Egypt, 
and some parts of Asia. 

If we could obtain an exact estimate of them 
in the different countries, or if the unsettled 
life of these people did not render it extremely 
difficult, perhaps impossible, to procure such in- 
formation, the immense number would probably 
greatly exceed what we have any idea of. At a 
moderate calculation, without being extravagant^ 
they might be reckoned at between 7 and 800,000. 
What a serious matter of consideration when wc 
reflect, that the greatest part of these people are 
idlers, cheats, and thieves! What a field does this 
open for the contemplation of governments !— • 
But more of this in another place. 



lö 



• CHAPTER III. 

The Propej'ties of tkei?' Bodies. 

Had the Gipseys made but a temporary appearance, 
and we could only be acquainted with them from 
the publications of former centuries, it would be 
difficult to entertain any other idea than that they 
w-ere a herd of monaters and beelzebubs. We find 
in those books frequent mention of a savage people, 
hluok horrid men. But now that they have conti-r 
pued to our time, and we have an opportunity of 
seeing, with pur own eyes, how they are formed, 
and what appearance they make, they are so fortu- 
nate as to have authors who commend their beauty, 
and take great pains to set forth their advantages; 
though many, indeed most of the modems, their 
colour and looks being the same, perfectly agree 
with the writers of past centuries, in their accounts 
of them. Both parties may be in the right, when 
we consider, that what appears beautiful in the eyes 
of one person, is possibly ugly and deformed in the 
eyes of another : this depends entirely upon habit 
and familiarity. For this reason, the dark brown, 
or olive coloured, skin of the Gipseys, with their 
white teeth appearing between their red lips, may 
be a disgusting sight to an European, unaccus- 
tomed to such objects, Let us only ask, As child- 



11 

ren, have we not, at some time or other, run 
aflfrighted from a Gipsey ? The case will be entirely 
altered, if we divest ourselves of the idea that a 
black skin is disagreeable. Their white teeth; 
their long black hair, on which they pride them-'^ 
selves very highly, and will not suffer to be cut off; 
their lively black rolling eyes ; — are, without dis- 
pute, properties which must be ranked among the 
list of beauties, even by the modern civilised Euro- 
pean world. They are neither overgrown giants, 
nor diminutive dwarfs : their limbs are formed in 
the justest proportion. Large bellies are, among 
them, as uncommon as hump-backs, blindness, or 
other corporeal defects. -When Grisellini asserts 
that the breasts of the Gipsey women, at the time 
of their nursing, increase to a larger size than the 
child they support, it is an assertion destitute of 
proof, and parallel with many other arguments he 
adduces to prove the Gipseys are Egyptians. Pro- 
bably he may have confounded himself, by think- 
ing of the Hottentots ; the circumstance above 
mentioned being true of them, though not of the 
Gipseys. Every Gipsey is naturally endued with 
agility, great suppleness in, and the free use of,* 
his limbs : ' these qualities are perceptible in his 
whole deportment, but in an extraordinary degree 
whenever he happens to be surprised in an improper 
place : in the act of thieving, with a stolen goose 
or fowl in his hand, he runs off so nimbly, that. 



IS 

^ unless his pursuer be on horsebaclN, the Gipsey is 
sure to escape. These people are blessed with an 
astonishingly good state of health. Neither wet 
nor dry weather, heat nor cold, let the extremes 
follow each other never so quickly, seems to have 
any effect on them. Gipseys are fond of a great ' 
degree of heat; their supreme luxury is, to lie day 
and night so near the fire, as to be in danger of 
burning : at the same time they can bear to travel 
in the severest cold bareheaded, with no other 
covering than a torn shirt, or some old rags care- 
lessly thrown over them, without fear of catching 
cold, cough, or any other disorder. 

By endeavouring to discover the causes of these 
bodily qualities of the Gipseys, we find them, or at 
Ipast some of them, very evidently arising from 
tlieir education and manner of life. They are lean ; 
but how should they be corpulent? as they are 
seldom guilty of excess in eating or drinking ; for if 
they get a full meal to-day, they must not repine 
should they be under the necessity of keeping fast 
to-morrow and the next day. They have iron consti- 
tutions, because they have been brought up hardily. 
The pitiless mother takes her thi-ec-nionths-old 
child upon her back, and wanders about in fair or 
foul weather, in heat or cold, without troubling 
her head what may happen to it, AVhen a boy at- 
tains the age of three years, his lot becomes still 
harder, ^^'hile an infant, and his age reckoned by 



13 

Weeks and months, he was at least wTapped up 
closely in rags ; but now, deprived even of tliese, 
he is, equally with his parents, exposed to the ri- 
gour of the elenients, for want of covering : he is 
now put to trial how far his legs will carrj- him,"^ 
and must be content to travel about, with, at most, 
no other defence for his feet than thin socks. 
Thus he grows up, and acquires his good health by 
hardship and mise^3^ AVe may as easily account 
for the colour of the Gipsey s skin. The Lap- 
landers, Samoieds, as well as the Siberians, like- 
wise, have brown yellow-coloured skins, in conse- 
quence of living, from their childhood, in smoke 
and dirt, in the same manner as the Gipseys : these 
would, long ago, have been divested of their 
swarthy complexions, if they had discontinued their 
lilthy mode of living. Only obser\'e a Gipsey from , 
his birth, till he reaches man s estate ; and you mu^t 
be convinced that their colour is not so much owing 
to their descent, as to the nastiness of their bodies 
In summer, the child is exposed to the scorching 
fiun ; in winter, it is shut up in a smoky hut. It is 
not uncommon for mothers to smear their children 
over with a black ointment, and leave them to fry- 
in the sun or near the fire. They seldom trouble 
themselves about washing, or other modes of clean- 
ing themselves. Experience also shews us, that the 
dark colour of the Gipseys, which is continued 
from generation to generation, is more the effect of 



14 

^lugation, and manner of life, than descent. 
Among those who profess music in Hungary, or 
serve in the Imperial army, where they have learnt 
to pay more attention to order and cleanliness, 
there are many to be found whose extraction is not 
at all discernible in their colour ; though they had, 
probably, remained to the age of twelve or fourteen 
years under the care of their filthy parents; and 
must necessarily, when they first adopted a differ- 
ent mode of life, have borne the marks ot the dirt 
contracted during this period. How much less, 
then, should we be able to distinguish a Gipsey if 
taken when a child from its sluttish mother, and 
brought up under some cleanly person ! By the 
same reasoning we may account for their white 
teeth and sound limbs ; namely, from their manner 
of life. The former are e^'idences of their spare 
diet : the latter prove them to hare been reared 
QEiDre according to the dictates of nature, than 
TOose of art and tenderness. 



15 



CHAPTER IV. 

On their Food and Beverage^ 

m 

Those Gipseys who are more connected with civi- 
lised people are not remarkable in their diet; 
though it is to be observed of them, that they are 
by no means particular in their cookerj-. The 
others, on the contrary, have their table furnished 
in a very irregular and extraordinary way. Some- 
times they fast, or at best have only bread and 
water to subsist upon : at other times they regale 
on fowls and geese. The greatest luxury to them 
is, when they can procure a roast of cattle tliat 
have died of any distemper. It is the same to them, 
whether it be the carrion of a sheep, hog, cow, or 
other beast, horse-flesh only excepted : they are so 
far from being disgusted with it, that to eat their 
fill of such a meal is to them the height of epi- 
curism. When any person censures their taste, or 
shew^s surprise at it, they answer, " The flesh of a 
beast which God kills, must be better than that of ^ 
one killed by the hand of man : " they therefore 
embrace every opporcunity of getting such dainties. 
That they take carrion from the laystalls, as is af- 
firmed of the Gipseys in Hungary, is not probable, 
any more than that they eat horse-flesh. IJut if a 
beast out of a herd die. and thev (iiul it before it 






16 

become rotten and putrefied ; or if a farmer give 
them notice of a cow dead in the stable ; they pro- 
ceed, without hesitation, to get possession of the 
booty. They are particularly fond of animals that 
have been destroyed by fire ; therefore, whenever 
a conflagration has happened, either in town or 
country, the next day the Gipseys, from every 
neighbouring quarter, assemble, and draw the suf- 
focated, half consumed, beasts out of the ashes. 
Men, women, and children, in troops, are ex- 
tremely busy, joyfully canying the flesh home to 
their dwellings : they return several times, provide 
themselves plentifully with this roast meat, and 
gluttonise in their huts as long as their noble fare 
lasts. Their manner of dressing this delicious food 
is curious : — they boil or roast what is intended 
for the first day ; if they have more than they can 
devour at once, the remainder is either dried in the 
sun, or smoked in their huts, and eaten without 
any further preparation. 

Something might here be introduced concerning 
their relish for human flesh, and the instances 
which some yeare ag-o happened in Hungary might 
be adduced as proofs *, were it not likely to be ob- 

* Bej/tragc zum Reichs Past renter^ St. 71. 1782. ** On the 
Slst oi Au**u$t there \vas a dreadful execution at Frauenmark in 
tho Hortenser country. Thirteen delinquents, Gipseys, vrho had 
cxisttnl twoKo years by robbing on the highway, and were accus- 
tomed to cat the bodies of those thev had murdered, were brought 



17 

• 

jccted, that these examples are at variance with 
common experience, as well as with the old ac- 
counts handed down to us concerning these people. 
We shall, therefore, not insist on this accusation : 
but entirely give up the poitit of Gipse)^s being 
men-eaters, except just hinting, that it would be 
expedient for governments to be watchful. But 
the instances in Hungary do not appear, by any 
means, so casual and uncommon as people may 
imagine. — What, according to the strictest exami- 
nation, has been done, not by one^ but many ; not 
by ten, but even tzvo hundred, and perhaps by thou- 
sands; not yesterday and torday, but many years 
back; finally, not by the whole body together, but 
single parties by themselves^ in different places: 
Shall these things be deemed only casual excesses ? 
Should it be asserted, in addition to this, that 
eating human flesh is in practice and allowed, in 
the country whence they originate ; we might with 
greater probability mention this shocking fact, of 
feeding on human flesh, as a prevailing custom 
among the Gipseys. This circumstance is expressly 
mentioned in histories : which assure us, that 

to punishment. Four of tlicm were women, who were behead- 
ed ; of the rcmainiug nine men, six were hanged, two were 
broken on the wheel, and the loader of this inhuman gang was 
quartered alive. It is said that one hundred and fifteen more, of 
these European cannibals, remain in the county gaols." Sec 
Appendix. 



18 

ainpng the particular class of people from whom 
the Gipseys sprung, it is a long-established custom 
for the nearest relations and friends to kill and eat 
each other. It is unnecessary to bring proof of it 
in this place, as it belongs to the second section : 
let it suffice just to have hinted the matter, in order 
that it may be known towards what people we are 
to look for the origin of the Gipsej^s. As to the 
objection, that among all the crimes with which 
they ha^ been charged in the older writings, 
eating human flesh is not positively alledged against 
them, it may be obviated by more than one an- 
sw^er. In the first place, let it be observed, history 
relates, and the event in Hungary confirms, that 
they murder one another ; further, consider their 
wandering mode of life ; lastly, that they generally 
abide in by places : and all may be easily accounted 
for. A hundred fathers may sacrifice their children 
to their voluptuousness, and the crime still remain 
concealed. The absent person is not missed; as 
nobody watches over a family continually in mo- 
tion, and every-where a stranger. Just as unlikely 
is it, that information should be given to govern- 
ment. There is no reason to suppose any of their 
own people would think it their duty to inform ; 
as, not being contrary to their usual practice, they 
do not esteem it wrong. It is very possible for 
them to have destroyed many other people, without 
the circumstances being recorded in the courts of 



justice, or noticed in the antiüäl publications. WHo 
ever thought to enquire of theih after any traveller 
that, far distant froih his own country, might 
have feilen into their haiids and been cut oflF ? Or 
how are the remains of the poor victim to be traced,- 
if they devour what is eatable, and burn the bones ? * 

* Hamburgh. Neue ZeitUhgy 151. St. 1782. " Hungary ^ 4tli 
of September. — ^Tbe following is to be added concerning the mur- 
derers and man-eaters. Forty of these miscreants have already 
undergone their deserved punishment, in three separate places. 
Some, as lately communicated, were broken upon ihe wheel*. 
ftom below upwards ; two of the most atrocious were quartered- 
alive ; and the remainder, one hundred and fifteen ini number; 
will shortly be proceeded against in the same manner. This band. 
has existed twenty-one years, and in the course of that time sacri- 
ficed eighty-four people to their cruelty. Every feeling mind* 
must be struck with horror at the infernal rage of these European 
cannibals, on hearing their confession«: — that once at a wedding* 
they killed three people, whom they ate with their guesti^, in the 
greatest festivity and joy ! They prefer the flesh of a young 
person from sixteen to eighteen years old. Theyburnt the bones, 
, which, according to their account, make excellent coals. A' 
life-guard ntan of the country undertook to secure and succeeded ia 
taking their WumpöscA^ or leader. This cannibal hero was magni- 
ficently dressed, ahd wore omameitts'in his cap to the value of six 
thousand guilders." 

Frankfurter Staats Rktretto, Nr. 157- 1782. " DonaU Strokm; 
S9th September.-— We mention with horror, that bcfeid^ those in- 
human wretciies who have already been put to the sword in Hün- 
gary, there are one hundred'and fifty still in chains; and somitf' 
thousands more are, with good foundation, suspectedi They arö 
all Gipseys* Maria Theresa had 'given otdto thUt ail thfese htf^ 

D 



20 

I 

Those Hungarian wretches have, according to 
their own account, for twelve years gratified their 
horrid cravings, undiscovered by the magistrates, 
in a country where the police is by no means 
ba4: perhaps they might have continued unsu- 

man vermin should be driven from their holes, and compelled to 
live in villages : but that wise regulation was not enforced, and 
the evil is now grown to such a height as scarcely to be remedied 
without a total extirpation of them." 

Hamburgh, Unpartkeiisch. Correspondmt, Nr. 159* 1782. 
" Hungary^ 22d September. — Besides those Gipsey cannibals 
which were executed on the 22d of August, at Fraumark, there 
were fifteen of these barbarians put to death on the twenty-fourth 
atKameza; and on the twenty-sixth, thirteen more at Esabrag. 
In the former place were seven women beheaded, five men hanged,- 
two broken alive on the wheel, and one quartered alive. At the 
latter place seven women were beheaded, four men hanged 
and two broken on the wheel. Many still remain in confine^ 
nient; among whom is one who acted as priest, and married 
people fpr two groschcns a time. Their hammpascha, who, as 
we lately advised, was taken by a very simple stratagem, cannot 
yet be brought to any confession of his crimes." 

Frankfurter Staats RistrettOy Nr. 207. 1782. '^ Donau Strokm, 
54th^ December. — Not long ago it was published, that forty-five 
of the. men-eaters had been executed in Hungary. One hundred 
and fifty still remain in prison, whose sentence has, by express 
orders from court, been respited. Her majesty, nolt thinking it 
possible that the people in confinement could have been guilty of 
«uch enormous crimes, sent a commissary thither from court to 
examine minutely into the affair. On his return it was confirmed 
that they were really men«eaters; and that there are actually 
among them sons who have killed and eaten their own fathers." 






2t 

»pected for ever, had they not laid their unlucky 
hands on the people of the country, thereby bring-^ 
ing on a strict enquiry, and rendering the discovery 
more easy. Nor do the older writings seem to be 
entirely silent on this head ; at least there is an ap- 
pearance of something of the kind in them. Many 
authors mention the Gipseys stealing people, ana 
accuse them particularly of lying ill wait for young 
children. Others again deny this, saying, that 
the Gipseys have brats enough of their own, and 
therefore have not the least reason to covet strange 
children. How does the matter look, if we sup- 
pose they did not want to rear these children, but 
to sacrifice theni. to their inordinate appetite ? — :and 
the Hungariati intelligence expressly says, they 
were particularly fond of young subjects. What 
renders the truth of this accusation in the old 
^vritings suspicious, is, that before even a single 
Gipsey had set his foot in Europe, the Jews lay 
under the same imputation. Perhaps in this, as 
in many other instances, the calumny invented 
against the Jews might be afterwards transferred 
to the Gipseys. This alone considered, the impu* 
tation of kidnapping children might become doubt- 
ful; but then occurs the weighty circumstance, 
that it has been judicially proved in England ; and, 
in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, an act of parlia- 
ment* was passed on the occasioii. Enough of 
this; let people reasoir upon the cannibal appetite 

D 2 



22 

» 

Qf the Gips^ys f s they ple^ßp, tigere will always re- 
toain grgund for suspicipjj. 

After haying shev^rn how Utflp delicate thpy arc 
ip satisfying their appetites, we should scarcely 
expect to ^pd them squeamish with regard to 
articles of diet that are highly esteemed among 
civilised people. But Griselini gives a long cata- 
Ipgue of things which, he says, are disagreeable 
to q, Gipsey's palate; among which, he particu- 
larly mentions beans an4 anions, red breanx, 
pearch, lampreys, with every kin4 of wild-fowl. 
Whereas the fact is, Gipseys not only eat beans 
^nd onions, but are veiy fond of them ; and as 
jfor the red bream, pearch and laqipreys, p^ieasa^ts, 
, partridges, &c. their only reasop fpr abstai^iflg from 
them is, the difficulty of procuring them : in which 
they are not singular ; many other people being in 
th^ same predicament. 

The Gipseys are not rnuch accustonied to baking; 
of bread; that is an article which they usually 
buy, beg or steal, or go entirely without. If. by 
chance they dp bake, the business is performed 
quite in the eastern method : — a wood fire is njade 
on the ground, which soon becomes embers j in 
the mean time the mother. Hneads her dough, forms 
it into small cakes, lays them on tl^e hot: ashes, 
9nd thus they are baked. 

To eat with a knife and fork, is nq part of a 
Gipsey's polite;(es$i WX- is a table^ or plate 



SS 

thought necessary : even a dish is frequently dis- 
pensed with. The whole kitchen and table appa* 
ratus consists of an earthen pot, an iron pan 
(which is also used as a dish), a knife, and ä spoon. 
. When the meal is ready, all the family sit around 
the pot or pan, the boiled or roast is divided into 
pieces, on which they fall-to; their, teeth and fingers 
serving them for knives and forks, as does the 
ground for table and plates. 

The common beverage of the Gipseys is water ; 
now and then beer, when it costs them nothing. 
Wine is too expensive, norls it particularly grateful 
to them. The case is very different when brandy 
comes in question, of which they are immoderately 
fond. They feel great pleasure in intoxicating 
themselves ; which being.easiest and soonest effected 
with brandy, it is in their esteem the only liquor worth 
purchasing; all they can earn goes that way: and 
whenever by chance they become possessed: of a^ 
penny, it is expended at the first house where' 
brandy is to be met with. Every christening, wed- 
ding, or other occasion of rejoicing, is- solemnised 
with brandy : if they have plenty of it, they, as it 
were, drive the world before them,* each trying, by 
screaming or holloing, to express his felicity and. 
consummate happiness. 

But, however great the thirst the Gipseys have 
for brandy, it is even exceeded by their immoderate 
love of tobacco. This is not, as might be supposed, 



24 

peculiar to the men ; for the women sometimes 
exceed them in it: and they not only smoke it, 
but chew and swallow the very leaves and stalks, 
with great avidity. That it may sooner reach its 
place of destination, and stimulate the gums and 
tongue more forcibly, they use a pipe not longer 
than one s finger : this pipe is made of wood, for 
economical reasons — as it absorbs the moisture, 
and thereby becomes a very great Gipsey delicacy ; 
for having smoked it as long as they choose, they 
gnaw it with astonishing greediness, till not a splin-* 
ter remains. It is immaterial, whether the pipe be 
smoked by the person himself or another, to bring 
it ta the proper degree of perfection : he accepts it, 
as a valuable present, from any body ; and is so 
chary of it, that it frequently lasts him many days. 
The Gipsey will abstain from food for more than 
a day, when he can procure a leaf of tobacco, or 
a piece of his pungent pipe, which he chews, drinks 
a little water, and is happy. This surely exceeds 
every thing that has been related of the most 
famous smoker 1 



ii 



CHAPTER V. 

On the Dress of the Gipseys. 

It cannot be expected that the description of the 
dress of a set of people whose whole economy be- 
longs to the class of beggars, should exhibit any 
thing but poverty and want. The first of them 
that came to Europe appeared ragged and misera- 
ble — unless we perhaps allow their leaders to have 
been an exception ;— in like manner their descend- 
ants have continued for hundreds of years, and' 
still remain. This is particularly remarkable in the 
countries about the mouth of the Danube, which 
abound with Gipseys; namely, Transylvania, Hun- 
gary, and Turkey in Europe, where they dress 
even more negligently than in other parts. 

The Gipseys consider a covering for the head as 
perfectly useless: the wind will not easily blow his 
hat off, who never wears any thing of the kind, 
excepting when he has a mind to make a 'figure, 
and even then a rough cap usually supplies its 
place. During the winter, if the female Gipseys 
do not knit socks, which those in Moldavia and 
Wallachia do, with wooden needfes, he winds a 
couple of rags round his feet, which in summer 
are laid aside as unnecessarv. He is not better 
furnished with linen, as the women neither spin, 



■I 



26 

»ew, nor wash. For want of change, what he 
once puts on his body, remains till it falls off of 
itself. His whole dress often consists of only a 
pair of breeches and a torn shirt 

We arc not to suppose, from what is said above, 
ihat the -Gipseys are indifferent about dress; on the 
contrary, they love fine clothes to an extravagant 
degrqe: the want proceeds ftom necessity, >vhich 
i^ become with them a second nature, forgetting 
. th^t labour and care are the means to procure 
clothes, as well as nourishment. Whenever an 
opportunity offers of acquiring a good coat, either 
l>y gift> purchase, or theft, the Gipsey imnüediately 
bestirs himself to become master of it: possessed 
of the prize, he puts it on directly, without con- 
sidering in the least, whether it suits the rest of 
his apparel. If his dirty shirt liad holes in it as big 
as a barn door, or hii^ breechei? were so out of con- 
dition thfiit one might perceive their antiquity at the 
first glance j were he unprovided with $hoes, stock- 
ings, or a covering for the head ; neither of these 
defects would prevent his strutting about in a laced 
coat, feeling himself of still greater consequence in 
case it happe];ied to be a red one. Martin K^lpius 
y therefore says, that the Gipseys in Transylvania 
spend all their earnings in alehouses ^d in clothjes. 
It would excite laughter in the sternest philosopher, 
to see a Gipsey parading about, ^ith a beaver 
])»t, ^ fiiUs. ox red cloth coat» at thje same timj^ his 



27 

breeches torn, and hisshoes or boots, if perchance 
he have either, covered with patches. 

Benko, also, assures us, that this kind of state 
is common in Transylvania; and adds, the Gipseys 
are particularly fond of clothes made after the Hun- 
garian fashion^ or which had been worn by people 
of distinction. The habits and properties of the 
Gipseys in Hungary are precisely the «ame. The 
following passage, which appeared in the Impe- 
Tid\ Gazettes, is very nmch to the purpose : " Not- 
*' withstanding these people are so wretched, that 
*' they have nothing but rags to cover them, which ^ 
*' do not at all fit, and arc scarcely sufficient to hide 
" their nakedness, yet they betray their foolish taste 
*' ^nd vain ostentation whenever they have an op- 
** portunity.-' 

In Transylvania, some of them wear the Walla- 
chian dress; but in Hungary they are so attached 
to the habits of the country, that a Gipsey had ra- 
ther go. half naked, or wrap him3elf up in a. sack, 
than he would condescend to wear a foreign garb, 
even though a very good one were given to him. 
Green is a favourite colour with the Gipseys; > 
but scarlet is held in so great esteem by them, that 
H man cannot appear abroad in a red habit, though 
Vpm out, without being surrounded by a crowd 
old and young, who, in the open street,, are soUcit- 
ous to purchase of him, be it coat, pellisse, or 
,bf ecches. Unless severely pinched by the cold, of 



58 

in case of the greatest necessity, they will not deign 
to put on a boor's coat : they rather choose to buy 
for their own use cast-ofF clothes ; and if they hap- 
pen to be ornamented with lace or loops, they strut 
about in such dresses, as proudl}^ as if they were 
not merely lords of the district, but of the whole 
creation. Thus all the money they can spare, is 
expended in obtaining a sort of clothes not at all 
becoming their station, and which answer no 
other purpose, but to betray their weak silly 
notions, and expose them to the ridicule of the 
more sensible part of mankind. They do not pay 
the least regard to symmetry, nor care what rea- 
sonable people think of their dress : provided they 
can only get something shining to put on, that will 
catch the eye, they give themselves no concern if 
' the rest of their clothing be very bad, or though 
tHey be nearly in a state of nudity. It is no un-^ 
common spectacle to see a Gipsey parading the 
streets in an embroidered pellisse, or laced coat 
decorated with silver buttons, with a dirty ragged 
shirt, barefooted, and without a hat; or with a pair 
of embroidered scarlet breeches on, and perhaps no 
other covering but half a shirt. 

Nothing pleases Hungarian Gipseys more than 
a pair of yellow (tschischmen) boots, and spurs : 
no sooner do the latter glitter on his feet, but he 
bridles up, and marches consequentially about, 
often eying his fine boots, at the same tim^ totally 



S9 

regardless of his breeches, which may have losts^ 
portion before or behind, or be in some otl^er 
respects quite shabby. 

The usual dress of the women is no better than 
that of the men; indeed they have generally bee» 
thought rather to go beyond thetn in filth and 
nastincss. Their appearance is truly disgusting to 
any civilised person: their whole covering consists 
of, either a piece of linen thrown over the head 
and wound round the thighs, or an old shift hung 
over them, through which their smoky hides appear 
in numberless places. Sometimes, in winter, they 
wrap themselves in a piece of woollen stuff like a 
cloak. Occasionally, their dress partakes of the 
other sex ; as they do not hesitate to wear breeches,; 
or other male habilament. They use the same cover- 
ing for the feet as the men ; — either a pair of coarse 
socks, knit with wooden needles, which is com- 
monly done in Moldavia* and Wallachia; or they 
sew them up in rags, which remain on till the stuff 
perishes and falls ofl^ or till spring arrives, at which 
season both men and women go barefooted*. 

The women are as fond of dress as the men, and 
equally ridiculous in their choice of it ; they are often 

♦About sixty years ago, ladies of the firet qualityjn Petcrsburgh 
used to be guilty of somewhat the same kind of irregularity. 
They had begun to adopt the French modes in dress ; but, as Sal-* 
men says, did not well know how to manage them. " Wherefore," 
he continues, '^ one must not be surprised, notwithstanding all 
** the stq-tc of a Pctersburgh lady, to meet one of them in summer. 



^ - 



30 

seen in a dress capy while their rotten linen jacket 
scaxcel J serves to cover their nakedness. In Spain^ 
they plaster their temples with great patches of 
black silk; and hang all sorts of trumpery in their 
cars, besides a number of baubles about the neck. 

The Gipseys were at very little trouble respect-» 
ing the dress of their children ; these ran about 
3fiaked^ in the true Calmuc style, till ten years of 
^e, wlten the boys got breeches, and the girls 
aprons. But this nuisance is at an end in the Im- 
peiial dominions, both in Gcrmapy and Hungaiy^ 
where an order to suppress it was issued out. by 
the emperor Joseph. 

Before we dismiss the subject of dress, we may 
mention a laudable custom established among the 
Gipseys, in order to save their clothes wheii they 
have quarreled, and mean to fight. Before they 
proceed to action, a truce takes place for a minute 
or two^ to give the combatants time to strip to their 
shirts, that their apparel may not suffer in the fray : 
then the storm breaks loose, and each lays on the 
other as hard as he can. The custom has this use 
in.it, that whenever any body appears in a ragged 
coat, he may affirm, on his honour, that it was 
not rendered so in a Gipsey brawl, 

f' at which season they use the English straw hats, magnificently 
5' dressed in damask, ornamented with gold» silver, lace, and 
5' ribbands, walking barefooted, carrying her slippers iu hei; 
f hand." 



31 



CHAPTER VI. 

On the Family Ecanomy of the Gipseys. • 

That these people are still the rude unpolished 
creatures that nature formed them, or, at most, have 
only advanced one degree towaixls humanity, is 
evinced, with other circumstances, by their family 
economy. 

Many of the Gipseys are stationary, having re- 
gular habitattions, according to their situation in 
life. To thifi. class belong those who keep public- 
housea in Spain; and others in Transylvania and' 
Hungary, who follow some regular business ; which 
latter have their own miserablis huts near Herman- 
s.tadt, Gronstadt, Bistritz, Grosswaradein, Debre- 
:5in, Eperies, Karchau, and -other places. There 
^re also many slaves, to particular bojars, in Mol- 
davia and Wallachia, who do not wander any more 
than the othiers. But by far the greatest number 
of these people lead a very different kind of life: 
ignorant of the comforts attending a fixed place of 
residence, they rove from one district to another in 
hordes, having no habitations but tents, holes in 
th^ rocks, or caves;* the former shade them in sum- 
mer, the latter screen them in winter. Many of 
these savage people, particularly in Germany and 
Spain; do not even carry tents with tliem, but 



S2 

shelter tliemselvcs, from the heat of the sun, in 
forests shaded by the rocks, or behind hedges : 
they are very partial to willows, under which they 
erect their sleeping place, at the close of the 
evening. Some live in their tents (in their lan- 
guage called tschaier) during both summer and 
winter; which indeed the Gipseys generally prefer. 
In Hungary, even those who have discontinued 
their rambling way of life, and built houses for 
themselves, seldom let a spring pass, without tak- 
ing advantage of the first settled weather, to set 
up a tent for their summer residence ; under this 
each one enjoys himself, with his family, nor thinks 
of his house till the winter returns, and the frost 
and snow drive him back to it again. 

The wandering Gipsey, in Hungary and Tran- 
sylvania, endeavours to procure a horse ; in Turkej% 
an ass serves to carry his wife, a couple of children, 
with his tent. When he arrives at a place he likes, 
near a village or city, he unpacks, pitches his tent, 
ties his animal to a stake to graze, and remains 
some weeks there : or if he do not find his station 
convenient, he breaks up in a day or two, loads his 
beast, and looks out for a more agreeable situation, 
near some other town. Indeed, it is not always in 
his power to determine how long he will remain in 
the same place ; for the boors are apt to trouble him, 
on account of fowls and geese he has made free 
with : it sometimes happens, when he is very. 



33 

much at his ease, they sally out with bludgeons or 
hedge-stakes, making use of such forcible argu- 
ments, that he does not hesitate a moment to set 
up his staff a little farther off: though, in general, 
the Gipseys are cunning enough, when they have 
purloined any thing, or done mischief, to make off 
in time before the villagers begin to suspect them. 
For their winter huts, they dig holes in the 
ground, ten or twelve feet deep ; the roof is com- 
posed of rafters laid across, which are covered with 
straw and sods : the stable, for the beast which 
carried the tent in summer, is a shed built at the 
entrance of the hollow, and closed up with dung 
and straw. This shed, and a little opening rising 
above the roof of their subterranean residence, to 
let out the smoke, are the only marks by which 4 
traveller can distinguish their dwellings. Both in 
summer and winter, they contrive to have their 
habitation in the neighbourhood of some village, or 
city. Their favourite mode of building is against a 
hillock ; the holes in the level ground being only 
used in cases of necessity, when there is no risr 
ing ground near the spot they liave chosen to pass 
the winter on. A Hungarian writer thus describes 
their method of constructing the second sort of 
huts: " They first dig a hollow, about a fathom 
."broad, far enough into the hillock to bring their 
" floor on a lc\'el with the rest of the plain, in order 
" to form a firm upright wall, for the back of the 



34 

" building. Into the wall they fix a beattf^ aiboot 
" six feet fromj and parallel to; the flboF ; this 
•* beam reaches as far as the intended depth of tlie 
" house, seldom exceeding seven or eight feefc. 
*^ One end being fast in the waH^ the other rest!» 
" on, and is fixed to, a pillar or post driven« into 
" the ground. When that is done, they lajT boas^Sy 
" balfcs, or such other wood as they can find, 
" against it on each side, ifi form of a pointed roofy 
" which, viewed from a distance, exhibits^ a front 
" in the shape of an equilater^ triangle. The bu- 
•^ siness is finished by covering the whole building 
" with straw, sods, and earth, to secure its inha- 
" bitants from the rain, snow, and* cold. They 
" always contrive, when they cart, to place their 
" edifice so as to front either the rising or mid-day 
" sun ; this being the side where the opening is left 
" for a door to go in and out atj which is closed at 
" night, either with a coarse woollen cloth or a few 
"boards." . 

Imagination will easily conceive how dismal and 
horrid the inside of such Gipsey huts must be to 
civilised humanity. Air and daylight excluded, 
very damp, and full of filth, they have more the 
appearance of wild beasts' dens, that of the habita* 
tions of intelligent beings. Rooms or separate 
apartments are not even thought of ; all is one open 
space: in the middle is the fire, serving both for the. 
purpose^ of cooking and warmth; the father and 



35 

mother lie half naked, the children entirely so, 
round it. Chairs, tables, beds or bedsteads, find 
no plaqe here; they sit, eat, sleep, on the bare 
grpund, or at most spread ah old blanket, or, in 
the Banat, a sheep-skin, under them. Every fine 
day the door is set open for the sun to shine in, 
which they continue watching so long as it is 
above the horizon ; when the day closes, they shut 
their door and consign themselves over to rest. 
When the weather is cold, or the snow prevents 
them opening the door, they make up the fire, and 
sit round it till they fall asleep, without any more 
light than it affords. 

The furniture and property of theGipseys have 
beeti already described ; they consist of an earthen 
pot, an iron pan, a spoon, a jug, and a knife J 
when it happens that every thing is complete, they 
sometimes add a dish: these serve for the whole 
family. When the mascer of the house is a smith 
by trade, as will be hereafter mentioned, he has a 
pair of bellows to blow up his fire, a small s^^one 
anvil, a pair of tongs, and perhaps a couple of ham- 
mers; add to these a few old tatters in which he 
dresses himself, his knapsack, some pieces of torn 
bed-clothes, his tent, with his antiquated jade, 
and you have a complete catalogue of a nomadic 
Gipsey's estate. 

Very little can be said respecting the domestic 
employment of the women. The care of their 

£ 






$6 

children is the most trifling concern : they neither 
wash, mend their clothes, nor clean their utensils ; 
they seldom bake : the whole of their business, 
then, is reduced to — dressing their food and eat- 
ing it^ smoking tobacco, prating, and sleeping. 
They continue during the whole winter in their 
hut; but at the first croaking of the frogs, they 
pull down their house, and decamp. 

Such is the condition of the Gipseys who wander 
atout in Hungary, Turkey, and other countries; 
being no-where, or rather every-where, at home. 
The remainder of these people who have reconciled 
themselves to a settled mode of living, are in much 
better circumstances, and infinitely more rational, 
than those just described. It will be expected, 
that those Spanish Gipseys who are innkeepers, 
and entertain strangers, are more civilised ; and 
it also holds good with regard to those in Hungar)' 
and Transylvania who have different ways of 
gaining a livelihood. Their habitations are con* 
veniently divided into chambers ; and are furnished 
with tables, benches, decent kitchen furniture, 
and other necessaries. The few who farm, or 
breed cattle, have a plough and other implements 
of husbandry ; the others, what is necessary for 
carrying on their trade ; though even here you are 
not to expect superfluity: habitations, clothes, 
every thing, indicate that their owners belong to 
the class of poor,^ They arc very partial to gold 



57 

.nd silver plate, particularly silver cups; which 
s a disposition they have in common with the 
vandering Gipseys : they let slip no opportunity 
)f acquiring something of the kind ; and will even 
starve ^themselves to procure it. Though they 
lecm little anxious to heap up riches for their 
children, yet these frequently inherit a treasure 
)f this sort, and are obliged in their turn to pre- 
serve it as a sacred inheritance. The ordinary 
:ravelling Gipseys when in possession of such a 
)iece of plate, commonly bury it under the hearth 
)f their dwelling, in order to secure it. This 
nclination to deprive themselves of necessaries, 
that they may possess a superfluity, as well as 
many other of their customs, is curious, yet ap-^ 
pears to be ancient ; and it was probably inherent 
in them when they were first seen by Europeans. 



£ £ 



38 



CHAPTER VII. 

Their Occupations and Trades. 

On considering the means to which the Gipse}'S 
have recourse to maintain themselves, we shall 
perceive the reason why poverty and want are so 
generally their lot ; namely, their excessive indo- 
lence, and aversion from industry. They abhor 
every kind of employment which is laborious or 
requires application; and had rather suffer even 
hunger and nakedness, than obviate these priva- 
tions on such hard terms. They therefore either 
choose some profession which requires little exer- 
tion, allowing them many idle hours; or addict 
themselves to unlawful courses, and vicious habits. 
Working in iron, is the most usual occupation 
of the Gipseys. In Spain, very few follow any. 
regular business; but among these few, some are 
smiths : on the contrary, in Hungary this profes- ' 
sion is so common among them, that there is a 
proverb — * So many Gipseys, so many smiths : * 
the same might be said of those in Transylvania, 
Wallachia, Moldavia, and all Turkey in Europe ; 
at least such workers in fire are very numerous in 
all those countries. This occupation seems to have 
been a favourite with them from the most distant 
periods, as appears not only by Bellonius's account, 



39 , 

but by an older record, of an Hungarian king 
Uladislaus, in the year 1496, mentioned by the 
A.bb^ Pray, in his Annals, and Friedwaldsky, in 
his Mineralogy, wherein it is ordered, that every 
officer and subject^ of whatever rank or condition^ 
do allow to Thomas Polgary leader of twenty-ßve 
. tents of wandering Gipseys^ free residence Cüery^ 
where, and on no account to molest either him or his 
people ; because they had prepared musket bullets, 
and other military stores^ for the Bishop Sigismund, 
at FünJTcirchen. Another instance occurred in the 
year 1565, when Mustapha, Turkish regent of 
Bosnia, besieged Crupa; the Turks having ex- 
pended their powder and cannon balls, Gipseys 
were employed to make the latter, part of iron, the 
rest of stone ceased with lead. 

The Gipseys of our time are not willing to un- 
dertake heavy work; they seldom go beyond a 
pair of light horse-shoes : in general, they con- 
fine themselves to small articles, such as rings, 
jews-harps, and small nails : they mend old pots 
and kettles, make knives, seals, needles, and 
sometimes work trifles in tin or brass. 

Their materials, tools, apparatus, all are bad, 
and of the most inferior kind. Their common 
method of proceeding is, to collect $ome pieces 
of rusty iron, old nails, broken horse-shoes„ and 
such-like, which they fuse and shape to. their 
purpose. The anvil is a stone ; the other imple- 



40 

ments are, a pair of hand-bellows, a pair of pin- 
cers, a hammer, a vice, and a file: these. are the 
tools which a nomadic Gipsey carries with him 
in his perambulations. Whenever he is disposed 
to work, he is at no loss for fuel : on his arrival 
at a station where he purposes remaining a few 
days, or perhaps weeks, he takes his beast, loads 
him with wood, builds a small kiln, and prepares 
his own coals. In favourable weather, his work 
is carried on in the open air ; when it is stormy, 
or the sun too powerful, he retires under his tent 
He does not stand, but sits down on the ground, 
cross-legged, to his work ; which position is ren- 
dered necessary, not only by custom, but by the 
quality of his tools. The wife sits by to work the 
^ bellows, in which operation she is sometimes re- 
lieved by the elder children; the little ones sit, 
naked as they were bom, round the fire. The 
Gipseys are generally praised for their dexterity 
and quickness, notwithstanding the wretched tools 
tliey have to operate with. When any piece of 
work requires much time to finish, they are apt 
to lose their patience, and in that case become 
indifferent whether it be well executed or not. 
They never submit to labour so long as they have 
got a diy crust, or any thing else to satisfy their 
hunger. They frequently receive orders to fabri- 
cate diflferent articles ; but if no^ no sooner arc a 
few nails, or some other trifles, manufiictured, than 



41 

man, woman, and children, dislodge, to convey 
their merchandise, from house to house, for sale, 
in the neighbouring villages: their traffick is 
carried on sometimes for ready money, sometimes 
by barter for eatables or other necessaries. 

Another branch of commerce much fpUowed by 
the Gipseys is horse dealing, to which they seem 
to have been attached from the earliest period of 
their history. In those parts of Hungary where 
the climate is so mild that horses may lie out all the 
year, the Gipseys avail themselves of this circum- 
stance to breed, as well as deal in, those animals ; 
by which they sometimes not only procure a compe* 
tence, but grow rich. Instances have been known 
on the Continent of Gipseys keeping from fifty to 
seventy horses each, and those the best bred horses 
of the country ; some of which they let out for 
hire, others they sold or exchanged, as occasion 
offered. But this description of Gipsey horse- 
dealers is not very numerous ; for the greatest 
number of them deal only in blind worn-out jades, 
which they drive about to different markets, to 
sell or barter. When the dealer is not fortunate 
enough to find a chap for his nag, he leads him to 
the collar-maker, who values the hide, and takes 
him off his hands for a few groschens. In order 
to prevent being reduced to this necessity, th? 
slyest tricks are practised to conceal the animals 
defects* In Spain, therefore, Gitano and Gitancria 



42 

(Gipsey and Gipseyism) are become familiar ex- 
pressions to imply a cheater in horses, with the 
deceptions he makes use of. In the year 1727 
they had become so infamous in Sweden, that the 
subject was thought of sufficient concequence for 
the consideration of the diet, and their total ex- 
pulsion was voted to be a necessary measure. 
The following trick is frequently played in Hun- 
gary, and the adjacent country, to make a horse 
appear brisk and active; — the rider alights at a 
small distance from the place where he means to 
offer his horse for sale, and belabours him till he 
has put the whole muscular system in motion with 
fright; he then mounts again, and proceeds. The 
poor beast ren.embering the blows he has received, 
jumps about, or sets out full speed, at the least 
signal; the buyer, entirely ignorant of the prepa- 
ratory discipline the animal has undergone, sup- 
poses this to be natural vivacity, and m hopes that 
good feeding, with care, will render him still more 
lively, strikes a bargain : but the next day he has 
' the mortification to discover that he has bought a 
.jade, on which all his care will be thrown away, as 
the beast has not a leg to stand upon. In Suabia, 
and on the Rhine, they have another device: — 
they make an incision in some hidden part of the 
skin, through which they blow the creature up, 
till he looks fleshy and plump; they then apply 
a strong sticking-plaster, to prevent the air from 



43 

returning. If what Wolfgang Franz assures us 
be true, they sometimes make use of a trick with a 
live eel, to this blown-up horse, that he may not 
only appear in good condition, but spirited and 
lively. It might he thought, that, on account of 
these and such-hke roguish proceedings, nobody 
would ever venture to deal with a Gipsey for a 
horse, were not the possibiHty proved by the 
fact itself. But we see instances of this infatuation 
in other transactions: it is well known that every 
Jew will cheat, whenever he has an opportunity ; 
yet these people have lived by trade, ever since their 
dispersion from Babel. Then, these frauds do not 
always happen : the Gipseys too sell their horses 
cheap ; and as poor people cannot afford to pay 
dear for them, they must buy where they can; 
and thus the Gipseys are enabled to continue their 
traDick. 

To the two professions before mentioned as com- 
monly followed by the men, may be added, those of 
carpenters and turners : the former make watering- 
troughs and chests ; the latter turn trenchers, 
dishes, make spoons and other trifling articles, 
which they hawk about. There are others who 
make sieves, or maintain themselves by cobbling 
shoes. Many of these, as well as the blacksmiths 
and whitesmiths, find constant employment in the 
houses of the better sort of people, for whom they 
work the year round. They are not paid in 



44 

money; but, beside other advantages, find 
certain subsistence. Those who are not thus cir- 
cumstanced, do not wait at home for customers, 
but, with their implements in a sack thrown over 
their shoulders, seek business in the cities or 
villages: when any one calls, they throw down 
the bundle, and prepare the apparatus for work, 
before the door of their employer. 

The Gipseys have a fixed disUke to agriculture; 
and had rather suffer hunger, or any privation, 
than follow the plough, to earn a decent livelihood. 
But, as there is no general rule without an excep- 
tion, so, beside the slaves to the bojars in Mol- 
dayia and Wallachia, who are constrained to 
apply to it, there are some in Hungary who are 
cultivators by choice. Since the year 1768, the 
Empress Theresa has commanded that the Hun- 
garian and Transylvanian Gipseys shouldf be in- 
structed in husbandry ; but these orders have been 
very little regarded. At this time there are so few 
of them farmers, in those parts, that they are un- 
deserving of notice; though in Spain, and other 
European countries, they are still more scarce, as it 
would be difficult to find one who had ever made 
a furrow in his life. 

Formerly, Gipseys were commonly employed in 
Hungary, and in Transylvania almost universally, 
for hangmen and executioners. They still perfonn 
the business of flayers in Hungary, and of execu- 



i_^ 



tioners in different parts of Transylvania-' Their 
assiduity in torturing, their cruel invention in tor^ 
menting, are described by Toppeltin to be so 
shocking, that the Gipseys seem eminently calcu- 
lated foi: works of barbarity. They do not follow 
flaying as a regular profession any-where ; it is 
merely ä casual occupation, in addition to their 
usual employment. Whenever a beast dies near 
where they happen to be, it is a fortunate circum- 
stance if there be no skinner in the place ; not be- 
cause they can make much of the skin, which they 
always leave with the owner for a trifling considera- ^ 
tion, bat they are thus enabled to procure a plenti- 
ful provision of flesh for the family. 

Such are the employments of the men. We shall 
now proceed to shew the particular methods the wo- 
men have of obtaining support. It was formerly, 
and still is, the custom, among the wandering Gip- 
seys, especially in winter, not for the man to main- 
tain the wife, but the wife the husband. This is 
not precisely the fact in summer, when the men 
have the before-recited occupations; nor among 
those who have a regular settlement; but the women 
always endeavour to contribute their share towards 
the maintainance of the family : some deal in old , 
clothes ; others frequent brothels, which is com- 
monly the case in 3pain, and still more so in Con- 
stantinople, and all over Turkey. There are others, 
in Constantinople, who make and sell brooms ; but 



46 

» 

this trade is followed by those chiefly who are too 
old to get a livelihood by their debauchery. Danc- 
ing is another means they have of obtaining contri- 
butions: they generally practise this when begging, 
particularly of men, in the streets ; or when they 
enter houses, to ask charity. Their dancing is the 
most disgusting that can be conceived, always end- 
ing with fulsome grimaces, or the most lascivious 
attitudes and gestures: nor is this indecency con- 
fined to the married women, but is rather more 
practised by young girls, travelling with their fa- 
thers, who are also musicians, and who, for a tri- 
fling acknowledgement, will exhibit their dexterity 
to any body who is pleased with these unseemly 
dances. They are trained up to this impudence 
from their earliest years, never suffering a passen- 
ger to pass their parents' hut, without endeavouring 
to obtain something by frisking about naked be- 
fore him. 

Respecting fortunetelling, with which the fe- 
male Gipseys impose on people s credulity, in every 
district and corner of Europe, little need be said. 
Yet it is extraordinary, that women^ generally too 
not till they become old, should be so sharpsighted 
as to discover, in every person's hand they are per- 
mitted to inspect, the events of futurity ! There are 
isome instances of men being thus gifted ; but so 
few, that they are only exceptions to a general rule. 
It is, therefore, to be ascribed to the Gipsey wo- 



47 

men alone, that faith in divination still exists in 
the minds of millions of people. It is true, Europe 
Avas not originally beholden to the Gipseys for 
this faith, it being deeply rooted in the ignorance 
of the middle age, when they arrived and brought 
it with them also. The science of divination here, 
was already brought to a much greater degree of 
perfection than among them : rules were invented 
to teli lies from the inspection of the hand ; where- 
as these poor wretches were esteemed mere bunglers. 
During the seventeenth and beginning of the 
eighteenth century the Gipseys were considered as 
only a supernumerary party ; there being men of 
great learning, who not only read lectures in col- 
lege on the divine art of chiromancy, but wrote 
many books, vilifying these people, and epdeavour- 
ing to spoil their market by exposing their ignor- 
ance. But those enlightened men are no more ; 
their knowledge is deposited in the dead archives 
of literature : and probably, if there were no Gip- 
seys, with them would also have died the belief in 
chiromancy, as has happened in regard to astro- 

* 

logy, necromancy, oneirocritica, and the other off- 
springs of imbecile fancy. By the Gipseys alone 
will this deceit be kept alive, till every Gipsey is 
constrained to acknowledge some country, and to 
have some ostensible mode of gaining a livelihood. 
We can only pity the poor weak deluded beings, 
who pay their groschen or kreutzer, their shilling' 



48 

or sixpence, for a few unmeaning words! — ^as if it 
were possible for people to instruct us concerning 
our future fortune in life, who are ignorant of their 
own ; being unable to determine whether a day or 
two hence, they may still be telling fortunes, or 
be taken before the magistrates, and hanged for 
theft. 

In addition to the Chiromantie deception of the 
Gipsey women, they also— though not exclusively, 
as the men likewise often profess the same talent — 
cure bewitched cattle, discover thefts, and possess 
nostrums of various kinds, to which they ascribe 
great virtues. These nostrums consist principally 
of roots, and amulets made of unfermented dough, 
marked with strange figures, and dried in the air. 
Griselini says, that, in the Banat of Temeswar, 
they sell certain small stones, chiefly a kind of 
scoriae, which they say possess the quality of ren- 
dering the wearer fortunate in love, play, &c. 
Were that true, why deliver to others what they 
have so much occasion for themselves? Why do 
they beg and steal, when, with the assistance of 
these stones, they might honourably acquire riches^ 
and good fortune ? Yet these stones are purchased 
with avidity, not only in the Banat, but in Ger- 
many. "People use their quack medicines; call 
the Gipsey woman into the stable, to exorcise 
their bewitched cattle, without suspecting any 
trick or deception. So the open-hearted farmer. 



49 

in Suabia and Bavaria, has recourse to the Gipseys 
on many occasions, employing them as doctors for 
man and beast ; and constantly, in cases of sup- 
posed enchantment, flies to the Gipsey : this cir- 
cumstance happens most frequently among those 
of the common people who pretend to have the 
least belief in witches and witchcraft. Whenever 
a cow does not feed kindly, something is immedi- 
ately suspected; and the Gipsey woman is called^ 
who is often so successful as to remove the impedi- 
ment. She goes into the stable, orders the cow to 
be shewn to her, and, after desiring every one else 
to go out, remains a few minutes alone with it: 
having finished her operations, she calls in the 
master, acquaints him with the beast's recovery, 
and behold it eats heartily! How happens this? 
Was it not a piece of enchantment, wherein the 
Gipsey really acted the magician ? Certainly not 
The fraud is this : — ^When the cattle are feeding 
abroad, the Gipsey woman, takes advantage of the 
keeper's absence to entice some of them, with a 
handful of foddier, to follow her ; she then smears 
them, over the nose and mouth, with some filthy 
composition, which she has ready in the other 
hand. From that moment the creature loaths all 
kinds of food and drink. When the Gipsey is 
called in to apply a remedy, the whole slfill re- 
quired, is to cleanse the animal's nose and mouth 
from the stuff she had, put on a day or two before : 



v^ 



50 . 

by this means the true smell is restored, and the 
cow being hungry, it is not surprising she should 
fall-to greedily. From this single instance, a 
judgment may be formed of other cases. * 

The more common Gipsey occupations, wherein 
the men and women take an equal share, are — in 
Spain, keeping inns ; principally music in Hungary 
and Turkey; and gold-washing in Transylvania, 
the Banat, Moldavia, and Wallachia. The Gip- 
seys, formerly, were concerned in smuggling ; and 
probably still are, although it is not mentioned by 
late writers. 

Both male and female Gipseys attend at enter- 
tainments with their music, and often shew great 
proficiency in the art : besides some wind instru- 
ment, they have generally a violin ; and many of 
them have attained so great perfection on that in- 
strument, as to be employed in the chapels of the 
nobility, and admired as great masters. Barna 
Mihaljfy in the country of Zips, who distinguished 
himself, about the middle of che last century, ia 
the chapel of the cardinal Count Emerick von 
Cschakj/f was an Orpheus of this kind. The car- 
dinal, who was a judge of music himself, had so 
great a regard for him, that he had his Ukeness 
taken by one of the most capital painters. In*- 
stances of the kind are not wanting in the other 
sex : it is well known that a Gipsey girl, at four- 
teen years of age, was so famous as a fidler, that 



SI 

the greatest and most fashionable fyeople in Hunr 
gary were accustomed to send twenty or thirty 
miles for her, to play at their balls. There are 
likewise very many scrapers ; these are generally 
such as have learned of other scrapers, at their 
ow^n expense. This kind of musicians travel 
about, with the dancers before mentioned ; or play 
to the peasants, who, not having much taste^ 
always make them welcome at their weddings, 
or dances. They scratch away on an old patched 
violin, or rumble on a broken base, neither caring 
about better instruments, nor minding to stop in 
tune; being what they are, more for want of 
application than capacity. Others practise vocal 
music; and some have acquired considerable for- 
tunes, particularly in Spain, by singing. 

Goldwashing, in the rivers, is anotlier occupa- 
tion; by which many thousand Gipseys, of both 
sexes, procure a livelihood, in the Banat, Tran- 
sylvania, Wallachia, and Moldavia. As this is 
only ä summer employment, they are under the 
necessity of finding some other means of support- 
ing themselves during the winter. It is not per- 
mitted for every one, without exception, to be a 
goldwasher : in Transylvania, such only can, follow 
the employment, who have leave from the office 
of Mons*; and these only enjoy the privilege under 

*-Tlie college of Mods was established in 174S, by the Em-^ 
press Theresa«, In the seventh article of the Instructions granted^ 
Xhe Gipseys w«re aUow«4>th« privilege 9f washing for gold. 
. ^ If ' 



Si 

oei^n restrictions. In Wallachia and Moldavia» 
Bone of the bojars^ slaves, thence called bcjaresk 
(bojar Gipseys), are suffered to meddle with gold- 
washing ^ that being a liberty granted only to 
those who, like other subjects, are immediately 
ander the prince, denominated domnesk (princely 
Gipseys): which are also subdivided into thre« 
classes; the first named Rudar ; the second Unati 
and the third Lajaschen. The Rudars alone have 
the licence above mentioned ; the others are obliged 
to seek a different means of obtaining support 
Each person is forced to pay a certain tribute to 
government. The goldwashers in Transylvania 
and the Banat pay ibur guilders annually, wliich 
is discharged in gold-dust: the same sum is due 
from every Gipsey^ though many evade the con- 
tribution. When the time for payment approaches, 
thöy contrive to keep out of the way, particularly 
the Hungarian Gipseys. The tribute collected in 
Wallachia and Moldavia does not go into the 
public treasur}% but belongs to the princesses fc^ 
pin-money. In Cantemir*s tune, that in Mol- 
davia produced yearly one thousand six hundred 
drachms : and the consort of Üie Walladiian hos- 
podar Stephen Rakowitza, in the year 1764» re- 
ceived from lier Rudars, two hundred and forty in 
number, twelve hundred and fifty*four drachms ; — - 
a sum, according to General von Bauer and Sidzer, 
aroounüng to one thousand and t&ee dnchms^ 



6$ ' 

Änc gold. What the Gipseys in Wallachia and 
Afokiam get more than their head-money, goes 
to the grand armasch, at two hon-guilders the 
drachm : this heafterwards sells again, at a higher 
price, according with its real value; as General 
von Bauer believes, for his own profit, not for that 
of the prince. The goldwashers in the Banat and 
Transylvania dispose of their share at the royal 
redemption-office, in Zalatnya. The earning^ of 
these people vary with time and at different places ; 
during heavy rains and floods they are usually 
most successful: besides, their profit is more or 
less, according to the quality of the river they 
wash in. At the most favourable times, viz. at 
the floods, Griselini calculates their daily gain not 
to exceed three grosqhens. If we understand, as 
we certainly ought^ that this sum is not earned by 
each person, but by a whole family, the state- 
ment will agree, pretty nearly, with Mr. Denib- 
scher's account : he says, " In tlie year 1 770 
** there were, in the districts of Uj-Palanka, 
** Orsova, and Caransebes, upwards of eighty 
^* goldwashers, all of whom had families, and 
*• followed the business, with their wives and 
** children; yet this number of hands delivered 
^* in only six or seven hundred ducats worth of 
** gold." Take half of the doubtful seventh hun- 
dred*; deduct three hundred and twenty guilders^ 
l^ead money, from the gross sum; divide the re- 

r2 



A4 

tnaindcr among eighty families, and each wifl 
receive yearly thirty-two guilders : allot to «ach 
day, in the summer half-year, its proportion, and 
it will be found very little more or less than three 
groschens. As before stated, the labour of two 
hundred Rudars produced, in the year 1764, 
twelve hundred fifty-four drachms: General von 
Bauer adds, this sum was exactly the half of what 
was collected, over the whole country, in the same 
year. Now as these Gipseys were under the 
necessity of parting with their twelve or thirteen 
hundred drg.chms, which remained after the capita* 
tion tax was paid, to the grand-armasch, at the 
rate of two lion-guilders per drachm, they earned 
still less than those in the Banat; although the 
rivers in Wallachia contain a sufficient plenty of 
gold to have enabled them to make ten times that 
advantage, did not their laziness prevent them. 
The Transylvanian rivers yield the most gold : there 
are annually, from eight to ten hundred weight 
separated from their sand, which are brought to 
Zalatnya, to be disposed of. As this quantity 
is not obtained by Gipseys only, but togetlier with 
' the Wallachians, and we have no account of the 
^ross number of goldwashers,. how many of them 
are Gipseys, nor what proportion they have of 
these eight hundred weight, it is impossible to 
ascertain the profits of the Transylvanian Gipsey 
goldwashers. That they are better off than tho9C 



56 

in the Banat and other places^ is certain, from the 
circumstance of the rivers abounding more with 
gold, than elsewhere. 

It may not be uninteresting in this place to 
give the process of gold washing, in the words of 
those who, as mineralogists, have superintended 
the work. The account communicated by the 
Councellor von Kotzian, concerning the goldwash- 
ing in the Banat, is as follows : ^^ The operation 
^^ consists in, first, providing a board of lime^^wood, 
' about one fathom long, and half a fathom broad ; 
' being hollowed at the upper end, in the form of 
' a dish, from which are cut ten or twelve chan- 
^ nels, in an oblique direction. This board is 
^ fixed in an inclined position so as to form an 
' angle of forty-five degrees with the horizon. 

* The sand containing the gold, being laid in the 

* hollow at the top of the board, a quantity of 

* water is then poured upon it, which carries off 

* the lighter parts ; such as are more heavy they 

* shove down by hand : what remains in the 

* channels, or furrows, is discharged into an ob*. 

* long tray, carried to the straining-trough, and 

* the gold which remains picked clean out. The 
^ whole of this work is peiformed in so careless a 

* manner, that much pure gold is lost : it is, 

* moreover, to be lamented, that the Gipseys get 

* only the gold which is perfectly separated from 
f the saiid, but by no means any that sticks to 



56 /, 

^^ the ore, which they throw away, though there 
" is gold in it." 

As it seems evident, from the foregoing state- 
ment, that this method is very inadequate to the 
purpose, and that consequently much gx)ld must 
be wasted, we are the more surprised when another 
author, in the following words, assures us of the 
contrary :-=— " So negligent and careless as the work 
*^ of the Gipseys appears at first sight, just as 
^' effectual it is proved when put to the test. Daily 
'* practice gives to these people a degree of dis- 
^^ cernment, without which another person would 
^^ think they tnust lose a great deal. I convinced 
** myself in the following manner : When they had 
*^ finished their washing on the board — for which 
*^ they commonly used from fifteen to twenty 
" troughs of coarse stuff — I divided the washed 
'* stuff into three parcels ; the ten or fifteen u^per- 
** most furrows always contaiped the most gold, 
** the second division not more than an eighth part 
*^ as much, but the last fifteen to twenty furrows 
" scarcely three grains. I have also narrowly 
^' examined the refuse, and very seldom found any 
" traces of gold in it" 

The art of gold washing is brought to much 
greater perfection in Transylvania. In tlie descrip- 
tion of the process adopted in that country, 
it is said that all the rivers, brooks, and even the 
pools which the rai^ forms, produce gpld: 



•• 



öf these the river Aranyotch in the richest, va^ 
sotnuch that the historians have compared it 
to the Tagüs and Pactolus^ Excepting the 
"Wallachians, who live by th« rivers, 4he gold* 
^washers consist chiefly of Oipseys* They can 
judge'with the greatest certitude where to wash to 
advantage. The apparatus used by them for this 
work is a erooked board, four or five feet long, 
by two or three broad, genenilly provided with 
a wooden rim on each side ; over tfai^ board they 
spread a woollen cloth, and scatter the gold-sand, 
mixed with water, upon it : the small grains of th« 
nietal remain sticking to the clodi, which they 
afterwards wash in a vessel of water, and then 
separate the gold by means of the trough. When 
larger particles of sand are found in their washing, 
they make deeper channels in the middle of theif 
crooked boards, to stop the small pieces as they 
roll down : they closely examine these small stones^ 
and some are frequently found to have solid gold 
fixed in them. 

Those we have mentioned are the eustoiftary 
|m)fes»ions and occupations of Gipseys, in the 
different countries and stated of Europe. But 
people must not imagine that their smiths' shops 
arc continually resounding with the hammer; not 
that those of other professions are so attentive %^ 
their callings, as to provide even a daily sob- 
mtence, not to think of a eomfortable maintea« 



58 

ancf • Their consummate lazine^, on the contraiy; 
as before observed, occasions so many idle hour» 
in the day, that their family is often reduced to the 
greatest distress for which reason, begging or 
stealing is by far a more common method, than 
diligence or assiduous application to business, for 
quieting the cravings of hunger. If we except 
soldiers, who are kept in order by the discipline of 
the corporal, with some of the Transylvanian gold* 
washers, who applj;^ to music — and, living separate 
from their own caste, in constant habits of inter- 
course with people of a better sort, have thereby 
acquired more civilised manners, and learned the 
distinction, if not between right and wrong, at 
least between social honour and disgrace — the re-» 
mainder are, in the most unlimited sense, arrant 
thieves. In fact, working at any trade, or employ- 
ment, seems to be merely a disguise^ in order the 
better to enable them to carry on their thieving 
practices ; as the articles which they prepare for sale 
in the cities and villages, furnish an excellent 
excuse for sneaking into houses, to pry where 
there is any thing which they may appropriate ta 
themselves. This kind of artifice is particularly the 
province of the women, who have always been 
reckoned more dextrous than the men in the art 
of stealing. They commonly take children with 
them, who are tutored to remain behind, in the 
outer part of tlie bouse, to purloin what thc;y cap, 



59 

vrhile the mother is negociating in the chamber. 
It is generally the women's o0ice to make away 
with the boor's geese and fowls, when they are to 
be found in a convenient place. Should the crea- 
ture make a noise when seized, it is killed and 
dressed for the consumption of the family ; but if^ 
by chance» /it have strayed so far from, the village» 
that its crying cannot give any alarm, they keep 
it alive to sell at the next market town. Winter 
is the time when the women generally are most 
<:alled upon to try their skill in this way : during 
that season, many of the men remain in their huts, 
sending the wonien abroad to forage. They go 
about in the guise of beggars — a character they 
well know how to support — and commonly carry 
with them a couple of children, miserably exposed to 
the cold and frost ; one of these is led by the hand, 
the other tied in a cloth to the woman's back, in 
order to excite compassion in well-disposed people. 
Whole troops of these Gipsey beggars arc met 
with in Spain ; and the encounter is by no means 
pleasant, as they ask alms in a manner, and with 
such importunity, as if they thought you could 
not deny them. They also tell fortunes; and 
ipnpose on the credulous with amulets. Besides 
all this, they seldom return to their husbands * 
without some pilfered booty. Many writers con- 
fine the thefts of the Gipsey s to small maters, and 
^ill not aUo^ that they are ever guilty of violence« 



^r^_ 




60 

This is not only denied by the testimony of othnu^ 
but absdutciy contradicted by some recent in- 
stances. It is true that, on account of their natund 
timidity^ they do hesitate to commit a robbery 
which appears to be attended with great danger, 
nor do they often break open houses by night : they 
father confine themselves to petty depredations, 
than, as they think, rush voluntarily into deitruc- 
tion by a great and dangerous action. Yet wc 
have more, than one proof, that they make no 
scruple to murder a traveller, or plunder (Aüss and 
Tillages. 




61 



CHAPT£R VIII. 

On their Marriages and Education. 

There arc not, perhaps, any other people among 
whom marriages are contracted with so little consi-^ 
deration, or solemnised with so little ceremony, as 
among the Gipseys. No sooner has a boy attained 
the age of fourteen or fifteen .years, than he begins 
to perceive that something more than mere eating 
and drinking is necessary to him. Having no fear 
of consequences, nor being under any restraint 
from his parents, lie forms a connection with the 
girl he most fancies, of twelve, or at most thirteen, 
3^ears old, without; any scruple of conscience, whe- 
ther she be his nearest relation, or an entire stranger ; 
but it is to be observed, that a Gipsey never mar- 
ries a person who is not of the true Gipsey breed, 
God's commandments are unknown to him ; and 
human laws cannot have much influence over one 
who lives in a desert, remote from the observation 
liftany ruling power. The term of courtship is very 
«hort, often only long enough for the parties to 
communicate their mutual inclination. They do 
not wait for any marriage ceremony, as it is a mat- 
ter of no consequence to them, whether it be per- 
fomied afterwards, or, not at all. Yet they do not 
£eem jfcobe tatmij^indifierent about matiimony, 






'-■- .- ."/ 



4» 

I* 




62 

not on account of conforming to any imtitation^ 
but from a pride they have in imitating what is done 
by other people, lest they should appear to be in- 
ferior to them. As the very early age of the parties^ 
pr some other irregularity, might meet with objec- 
tions from a regular clergyman, they frequently get 
one of their own people to act the priest, and tack 
the decent couple together. A marriage being thus 
accompHshed, the man provides a stone for an anvil, 
a pair of pincers^ a file, and hammers away as a 
smith ; or works at some other trade, he may have just 
learned from his father: then begins his peregrina-« 
tion. Should his wife commit a fault at a future 
time, he gives her half a dozen boxes on the fear ; 
or very likely, for some trifling cause, turns her off 
entirely. Her conduct must, in general, be very 
much regulated by his will; and she is obliged to 
be more attentive to him than t© herself- When 
the woman lies-in, which happens frequently, these 
people being remarkably prolific, the child is 
brought forth, either in t^ir miserable hut, or, 
according to circumstances, it may be in the opea 
air, but always easily and fortunately : a womai^a^ 
the same kind performs the office of midwife« 
True Gipsey like, for want of some vessel, they dig 
a hole in the ground, which is filled up with cold 

water, and the new-bom child washed in it This 

ft 

being done, it is wrapped up in some old rags, 
which the motherly foresight has t^lj^ßfi care to pro*^ 




■■ ■ c.'"*jfe 



63 

vide. Next comes the christening, at which cere- 
mony they prefer strangers, for witnesses, rather 
than their own caste : but what kind of folks their 
guests are, may be collected from the mode of en* 
tertaining them. When the christening is over, 
the father takes the sponsors to an alehouse, or if 
none be near, to ?ome other house, where he treats 
them with cakes and brandy. If he is a little above 
the lowest state of misery, and has a mind to be 
generous, other things are provided ; but he doe« 
not join the company, being employed in serving 
his guests. Thus the affair ends. The lying-in 
woman passes her short time of confinement, sel- 
dom exceeding eight days, with her child, in the 
hut, or under a tent, in the smoke by the fire. 
Refreshments are often sent from the godfathers 
and godmothers ; yet they are sometimes so un- 
civil, that they do not hesitate to quarrel with them 
or even to discharge them from the trust, if they 
think the present top small, or do not like the provi- 
«ons. When this wiappens, they have another 
christening, in some other place; nay, sometimes 

en a third. 

Gipsey women, as already mentioned, frequently 
^smear their children over with a particular kind of 
cLntment, and then lay them in the sun, or before 
the fire, in order that the skin may be more com- 
pletely parched, and their black beauty thereby 
increased. They' never use a cradle, nor even 




«4 

possets such a piece of furniture ; the cbild sleeps 
in its mother's arms, or on the ground. When the 
lying-in is over, the Gipsey woman goes to churcli^ 
and thence, immediately, either to begging or 
stealing. While the child remains in her arms, 
perhaps imagining that people will be less severe 
in their chastisements, she is more rapacious . than 
at other times, and takes whatever she can lay her 
hands on. If she cannot escape without a beating, 
she endeavours to screen herself by holding up the 
child to receive the blows, till she finds an op- 
portunity of retiring imperceptibly, and running 
awav. 

When the child gets a little stronger, and has 
attained the age of three or four months, the mo- 
ther seldom carries it on the arm, but at herback; 
there it sits, winter and summer, in a linen rag, 
with its head over her shoulder. If she have more 
children, in course of time, which is generally the 
case, as this race of beings is so prolifick, she leads 
one or two by the hand, \^ile such as are older 
run by het side ; and thus attended, she strolls 
through the villages and into houses. . Notwithh 
standing their dark complexion, and bad nursing 
writers are unanimous in stating, that these child- 
ren are good-looking, well shaped, lively, clever, 
and have fine eyes. The mother plaits their black 
hair on the crown of the head, partly to keep ib 
out of their face, and partly for ornament Thii 



IS all she ever ctoes towards decorating herofftpring; 
for in summer the children wear no clothes till ten 
years of age, and in winter they are forced to be 
content with a few old rags hung about them. 

No sooner is the child, whether boy or girl, ca- 
pable of running about, than it is taught to dance; 
which talent consists in jumping on one foot, and 
constantly striking behind ^ith the other, As the 
young Gipsey grows up, all kinds of postures are 
added, in hopes of diverting, and thereby to ob- 
tain a reward from persons who happen to pass the 
parents' habitation- What the children are further 
taught, especially by their mothers, is the art of 
ttealing, which they often put in practice, as be* 
ft>re related. Instmction or school is never thought 
of; nor do they learn any business, except perhaps 
to blow the fire when the father forges, or to assist 
in goldwashing. 

By the twelfth or thirteenth year, a boy acquires 
some knowledge of his father's trade ; and then be- 
comes emancipated from parental authority ; as he 
WW begins to think of forming his own separate 
connections. The Gipseys, in common with unci- 
vilised people, entertain unbounded love for theif 
children: this is a source of the most unpardonable 
neglect Gipsey children never feel the rod ; they 
fly into the most violent passion, and at the same 
time hear nothing from their parents but flattery 
^d coaxing. In return, tliey act, as is commonly 



66 

the consequence of «uch educatioQ, with the gfeat^ 
est ingratitude. This excessive fondness for their 
children is, however, attended with one advantage : 
— when they are indebted to any person, which is 
frequently the case in Hungary and Transylvania, 
the creditor seizes a child, and by that means ob- 
tains a settlement of his demand ; as the Gipsey 
will immediately exert every method to discbarge 
the debt, and procure the release of his darling 
oiTspring. 

To the beforegoing account of Gipsey marriages, 
and education, there are but few exceptions ; com- 
prised in a small proportion of them who have fixed 
habitations. The character of people being formed 
^ by tiic instruction they receive in their early years, 
can it then be thought surprising that Gipseys 
should be idlers, thieves, murderers, and incendia- 
ries r Is it probable, that man should become di- 
ligent, who has been educated in laziness I Can it 
be expected those should leave every person in pos- 
session of his own property, whose &ther and mo- 
tl)er luive taught them to steal, from their earliest 
intancy r Who can ha\T a general idea of fair deal- 
ing, tliat know$ not ri^t tVoni wran^ nor has ever 
Ic^mevt the distinction between good and evil, vir- 
tue and \nce: Punishnvoits inflicted on otlien^ 
Kvr iheir crinx^ ha^^ no dSect npnn one ^rfio is 
IKH $nffioienf iy attnxli^T to take wamii^ by die 
OLau>)^k^ Ol ;^trwsa$: and wh»» bv Ik oira ex- 



67 

pcrience, he is taught not to lay hands on the pro* 
perty of others, he is become so hardened, that 
the milder punishments leave no lasting impression ; 
while the more severe ones, which reach the life, 
cannot have any effect on him, and are, as before ob- 
served, totally disregarded by his fellows. So long 
therefore as the education of the Gipseys conti- 
nues to be what it is, we cannot hope that they 
itihould leave ofi* their vile practices and filthy habits. 



6 



66^ 



tttATTZK IX. 

« t 

Ott their Skkness^ Death^ and'BuriaL 

^%Mvft bi^ore had occasion, to mention the, con 

stftfnt. good health ofi th^ßQ people; and it is fact 

tbi^t; thegr; do wjpy it more uninterruptedly^ an 

pfirfeptly^ thw persons of the most regular hahib 

and \trho pay the greatest attention to themselve 

They get no cold nor defluxions, from the incU 

nency of the air. They are not subject to rashes 

even poisons^ or epidemical disorders, have no eSki 

upon them. Any prevailing sickness penetrate 

sooner into ten habitations of civilised people, tha 

it finds its way under a Gipsey's tent, or into h 

hut They are equally liable to the small-pox an 

measles with other people, though with infinite! 

less danger ; and they are subject to a disorder i 

the eyes, occasioned by the continual smoke ac 

steam in their huts, during the winter season : e: 

cepting these complaints, the Gipseys, in genen 

experience littfe inconvenience till die time com 

that Nature demands her own back again, and e 

tirely destroys the machine. Though this be n< 

always at a great age, it is generally at an advano 

period ; it being very uncommon for a Gipsey 

die early in life, or during his childhood. Th( 

iove of life is excessive ; yet they hardly ever tal 



69 

tl^^ advice of a physician, or use medicines, eveti ill 
tlx^e most dangerous maladies. They generally 
le^ve every thing to nature, or good fortune: if 
th^y do any thhig, it is, to mix a little saffron in 
the^irsoup, or bleed and scarify themselves; having" 
ol>served that their horses use bleeding, as a remedy 
fof disorders. When the sickness indicates danger, 
aiid that the universal enemy to life is really inL' 
earnest, the Gipsey breaks out into sighs and la- 
itientations, on account of his departure ; till at last 
\he gives up the ghost, in his usual place of resid- 
ence — under a tree, or in his tent. 

The preparations for death are usually regulated 
according to a person's religious principles ; but the 
Gipsey, who neither knows nor believes any thing' 
concerning the immortality of the soul, or of re- 
wards and punishments beyond this life, for the* 
moslt part dies Kke a beast— ignorant pf himself and 
Ks Creator, as well as utterly incapable of forming« 
any opinion respecting a higher destination. 

The Gipsey's decease is instantly succeeded by 
the most frantic lamentations: parents, ' in par- 
bcular, who have lost their children, appear m-' 
cbnsoläblc. Little can be said of their buriäk;' 
only, that on those occasions the cries and be- 
^^ailitigs are redoubled; and become very violent' 
When' the leader of a horde' dies, things' are cotl- 
ducted more quietly. His otvii peopfle carry hhtij 

q2 



. '/ 



Ä 






70 

with great respect, to the grave^ where each (me 
appears earnest and attentive; although at the 3aine 
time employed in a manner to excite laughter. 

This is the mode of proceeding When a Gipsey 
dies a natural death. But it often happens that he 
loses his life by violent means — not by his own 
hands for self-murder and infanticide are equally 
unheard of among them. No Gipsey ever puts a 
period to his own existence on account of vexation^ ^ 
anxiety, or despair; as, besides his unboundeA- 
love of life, care or despair is totally unknowi^- 
to him. 

Even in the greatest distress, the Gipsey is never^ 
troubled with low spirits ; ever merry and blythe, 
he dies not till he cannot help it : this often happens 
on the gallows, attended with scenes ridiculous as 
the most ludicrous imagination could invent One 
man requested, as a particular act of grace, that 
he might not be hanged with his face towards the 
high road ; saying, " Many of his acquaintance 
*^ passed that way, and he should be very much 
** ashamed to be seen by them hanging on a gal? 
** lows.^ At another time the relations of a Gipsey 
who was leading to execution, perceiying, by the 
discourse and gestures of the criminal, how un- 
willingly he advanced, not having the least inclina- 
tion to be hanged, addressed themselves to the 
magistrates and officers of justice, with theXfoUow- 



V 

s. 

t 



\ 



71 

ing wiise remonstrance : " Gentlemen, pray do 

" not compel a man to a thing for which you see 
^* he has no desire nor inclination." Such scenes 
happen at almost every Gipsey execution, which 
are proofs that these people are quite deficient in 
thought or considevJition, 



72 



CHAPf ER X. 

Political Repilations peculiar to the Gipseys. 

When the Gipseys first arrived la Europe, they 
had leaders and chiefs, to conduct the varioua 
tribes in their migrations. This was necessary, 
not only to facilitate their progress through difFcrent 
coantries and quarters of the globe, but to unite 
their force if necessary, and thereby enable them 
to make a more formidable resistance when op- 
posed ; and likewise to cirry any plan, they might 
have formed, more rcadilv into execution. We 
accordingly find, in old b')oks, mention made of 
knights, counts, dukes, and kings. Krantz and 
Munster mention counts, and knights, in gene- 
ral terms, among the Gipseys; other people give 
us the very names of these dignified men : Crusius 
cites a duke Michael; Muratori a duke An- 
PREAs; and Aventinus records a king Zindelo: 
not to speak of inscriptions on monuments, erected 
in different places, to the memories of duke Panuel^ 
count JoHAKNis ; and a noble knight Petrus, in 
the fifteenth century. But no comment is requisite^ 
to shew how improperly these appellations were 
applied. Though the Gipsey chiefs might be gra- 
tified with these titles, and their dependants pro« 
bably esteemed them people of rauki it was merely 



73 

a ridiculous imitation of what they had seen and 
admired among civilised people. Nevertheless, 
4hd custom of having leaders and chiefs over them 
prevails to this time, at least in Htmgaiy and 
Transylvania; probaibly it «nay also still exist in 
Turkey, and other fcoutttries wheWe thfeBe peoplb 
*lir«e together in great tnambers. 

Their chicfs-^^Är waywodes, as they ptoudlgr 
call them— ^vlrfcre formerly of t(vo de^ceei in Huif- 
gary. Each petty tribe had ilDs own leader i; beside V 
^which, there were four supetiör wayw5cKtes, of äieir 
x)wn caste, xm botii sides the Danube «nd Teiösfe, 
^hose usual residefices we^ at Raab, LlewehtQ^ 
S^athmar, and Kaschau: ^ these ibhe sfmaltelr 
ipvaywode» were accountable. It wwAd appftfr 
extraordinary that any welt-regulated stati sfaqutfl 
^Uow thei^ people a distmct eistablishm^ekit in "^ 
iieart of the country, did not the üungariaü *wrMttB 
assign a reason: t'vz. that in thk cotnTnDtbns aad 
troubles, occaisioned by the Turkish war% ifn'for* 
;mer ccÄturies, they vtei^j by 'meianis of thdSr MWiy- 
ivodes, more easily summidned^ wteii oeiAritiu 
required, and rendered usefuf to the ismfhfXKXf^ 
But the Gipseys in Hungary and Tmnsylvama weifei 
permitted to choose^ from th^ir b\m people, only 
the small way wodes of each tribe. The «nfierior 
Waywödets, to whorh the Gipseys, in many dis- 
tricts, were subject, have existed ttH witbih a fif*r 
yeark ; biit they wesre appoi«»d iby the mmt^ a&d 



• 74 

always selected from the Hungarian nobility« 
The appointment was by no nieans despicable; 
as each Gipsey was bound to pay the superintend- 
ent under whom his. tribe was classed, a guilder 
annually, of which one half was demanded at 
Easter, the other half at Michaelmas. In order 
to Vender the levying this tax more certain, the 
magistrates, in all towns, cities, and villages, 
were ordered to be assisting to the collectors, 
where necessary ; to protect them also from any 
violence that might be olfered by the Gipsey s. 
These superior waywodes are now no longer ap- 
pointed, except a single one in Transylvania, who 
has authority over the goldwashers in those parts. 
But the Gipsey s still continue the custom, among 
themselves, of dignifying certain persons, whom 
they make heads over them, and call by the ex-» 
alted Sclavonian title — waywode. To choose 
their waywode, the Gipseys take the opportunity 
when a great number of them, arc assembled in 
one place, commonly in the open field. The 
elected person is lifted up three times, amidst the 
loudest acclamations, and coufirmed in his dignity 
by presents; his wife undergoes the sam'e cere-, 
mony. When this solemnity is performed, they 
separate with great conceit, imagining themselves 
people of more consequence than electors returning 
from the choice of an emperor. Every one who 
ja of a family desijead^d frow a formejr waywode 



■ 75 

is eligible; but those who are best clothed^ not 
very poor, of large stature, and about the middle 
age, have generally the preference. Understand- 
ing or wise conduct is of no consideration : there- 
fore it is easy to distinguish the wayWode from 
the multitude, by observing his size and clothing. 
The particular distinguishing mark of dignity, is 
a large whip, hanging over the shoulder. His 
outward deportment, his ^V^alk and air, also plainly 
shew his head to be filled with notions of au- 
thority. 

It is uncertain how far the way wode's sway over 
his subjects extends. A distinction must here be 
made, whether the slate gives him any power, 
and what he assumes or derives by custom from 
liis caste. It were ridiculous to suppose that the 
st^.te should, on any occasion, appoint this sort of 
illustrious personage a judge. In Transylvania, 
indeed, . the magistrates Ho interfere with regard 
to the fellow whom this or that horde has elected 
chief, and impose an obligation on him ; but it 
is only that he should be careful to prevent his 
nimble subjects from absconding, when the time 
arrives for them to discharge their annual tribute 
at the land-regents chamber. He has no right to 
interfere in disputes or quarrels which the Gipseys 
havä among themselves, or with other people, 
further than to give notice of them to the regular 
i^purts of the district where they happen to be. 



76 

In this point of view, what Toppdtin and others 
j&fter him assert, that the way wodes have little or 
no power over their own people, i^ perfectly cor- 
jFect :. but if we attend to their actions, the affair 
carries a very different appearance. Whenever a 
complaint is made, that any of their people have 
been guilty of theft, the way wode not only orders 
n general search to be made, in every tent or hut, 
and returns the stolen goods to the owner, if they 
can be found, but punishes the thief, in presence 
of the complainant, with his whip. Certainly it 
is not by any written contract that he acquirei^^ 
his right over the people, for no such thing cxistii-- 
among them, but custom gives him this, judicial 
power. Moreover he does not punish the aggressor 
from any regard to justice, but rather to quiet the 
plaintiff, and at the same time to make his people 
more wary in their thefts, as well as more dextrous 
in concealing their plunder. These discoveries 
materially concern him, since by every detection 
his income suffers ; as the whole profit of his office 
arises from his share of the articles that arc stolen« 
Every time a Gipsey brings in a booty, he is 
obliged to give information to the arch-Gipsey fs£ 
his successful enterprise; and then render a just 
account of what and how much he has stolen, 
in order that the proper division may be made^ 
In this. proceeding the Gipsey considers himself 
Jjound to give a fair and true detail; though in 



77 



every- other instance he does not hesitate to commit 
the grossest perjury. We may therefore judge 
how precarious success is likely to be, when a 
jvaywode is applied to for the recovery of stolen 
goo^s. The Gipseys are cunning enough to hide 
what they have pili'ered, in such a manner, that 
out of a hundred searches the complainer hardly 
once accomplishes his desire. It does not at all 
forward the cause, that the waywode knows who 
the thief is : his interest requires him to dissemble. 
Thus, though he does not steal himself, the Span- 
ish proverb is a very true one : " The Count and-^ 
the Gipsey are rogues alike." For which reason 
people seldom apply to so suspicious a judge. If 
a thjef is caught in the fact, the owner takes his 
property, and gives the offender his proper reward, 
or else delivers hint over to the civil power for 
correction. Here ensues a truly laughable scene : 
As soon as the officer seizes on, and forces away 
the culprit, he is surrounded by a swarm of 
Gipseys, who take unspeakable pains to procure 
the release of the prisoner. They endeavour to 
cajole him with kind words, desiring him to con- 
sider this, that, and the other, or admonish him 
not to be so uncivil. When it comes to the 
infliction of punishment, and the malefactor rcr 
ceives a good number of lashes, well laid on, in 
the public market-place, an universal lamentation 
. commences among the vile crew ; ^^ch stretches 



78 

his throat, to cry over the ag-ony his dear associate 
is constrained to suffer. This is oftener the fate 
of the women than of the men ; for, as the main- 
tenance of the family depends most upon them, 
they more frequently go out for plunden 



79 



CHAPTER XI. 

On the Religion of the Gipseys. 

TijESE people did not bring any particular religion 
with them from their native country, by which,' 
as the Jews, they could be distinguished among 
other persons ; but regulate themselves, in religious 
matters, according to the country where they live. 
Being very inconstant in their choice of residence, 
they are likewise so in respect to religion. No 
Gipsey has an* idea of submission to any fixed pro- 
fession of faith : it is as easy for him to change his 
religion at .every new village, as for another person 
to shift his coat. They suffer themselves to be bap- 
tised in Christian countries; among Mahometans 
to be circumcised. They are Greeks with Greeks, 
Catholics with Catholics, and again profess them- 
' selves to be Protestants, ' whenever they happen 
to reside where protestantism prevails. 

Fram this mutability, we may conceive what 
ideas they have, and thence deduce their general 
opinions of religion. As parents suffer their' 
children to grow up without education or instruc- 
tion, and were reared in the same manner them-- 
s'elves, sOi neither have any knowledge of God or 
morality. Few of them will attend to any discourse 



80 

on religion : they hear what is said with indiffer- 
ence, nay rather with impatience and repugnance ; 
despising all remonstrance, believing nothing, they 
live without the least solicitude concerning what 
shall become of them after this hfe. An in- 
stance, .quoted by Toppeltin, will fully illustrate 
this matter: One of the more civilised Gipseys inx 
Transylvania took the resolution of sending his son^ 
to school : leave being obtained from the govern* 
ment, the lad was admitted, and was going on 
very well, under his teachers' hands. The child 
died; whereupon the relations applieil to the 
magistrates and clergy for permission to give the 
young man Christian burial, he being a student 
at the time of his death. On this occasion the' 
priest asked, whether they believed the deceased 
would rise again at the last day? — " Stränge idea / " 
they answered ; " to believe that a carcase, a lifekss 
" corpse, should be reanimated, and rise again ! — 
" In our opinion, it would be no /more likely to hap^ 
^^ pen to him, than to the horse we flayed a few days- 
" agor Such are the opinions of the greatest part 
of these people with regard to religion ; it naturally 
follows, that their conduct should be conformable^ 
to such ideas and conceptions. Every 'duty is- 
neglected, no prayer ever passes their lips: as 
kittle are they to be found in any assembly of- 
public worship; whence the Wal lachian adag( 



81 

*^ The Gipsqr's church was built with bacon, and 
** the dogs ate it" The religious; party from which 
a Gipsey apostatise^ as little loses a. brother 
believer, as the one into which he goes acquires 
one. He is neither Mahometan nor Christian; 
for the doctrines of Mahomet and of Christ are 
alike unknown or indifferent to him, producing 
»o other effect than that in Turkey his child is 
circumcised, and baptised in Christendom. The 
Turks are so fully convinced of the little sincerity 
the Gipseys entertain in regard to religion, that al- 
tbpugh a Jew, by becoming a Mahometan, is freed 
from thepaymencof the charadsch, the Gipseys arc 
not, at least in the neighbourhood of Constan- 
tinople. They are compelled to pay this poll tax 
even though their ancestors, for centuries back^ 
had been Mahometans; or though they should 
actually have been a pilgiimage to Mecca : the 
privilege of wearing a white turban is the only 
advantage their conversion gives them overrun- 
believing Jews and Gipseys. 

Such is the respect paid by the Gipseys to 
moral institutions, in every country where they 
are found. It' is true that in this, as well as in 
other things, there may be exceptions, but they 
are very rare ; by much the greatest part of them 
are as above described. Wherefore the more 
ancient, s^s well as the more modern^ writers 



82 

Agree, . in positively denying that the Grpscys 
have any religion; placing them even below the 
heathens. This sentence cannot be contradicted; 
«ince, so far from having a respect for religion, 
they are adverse to evefry thing wWch in the 
least relates to it. 



^ ^ 



M 



CHAPTER XII. 

Tketr Language^ Sciences^ aria Aris. 

B£sit>S8 that the Gipseys understand and dpeak 
the language of the country where they live, they 
have a general language of their own, in which 
they always converse with each other. Writers 
differ in opinion concerning this language, being 
undecided whetter it be really that ot' any countryj 
and ivIh) are the people from whom it originates» 
Some pronounce it a mere jargon, others say it 
is gibberish« We can by no means agree with 
the supporters of the first opinion, as the only 
ground for the assertion is barely, that tliey do 
not know any other language correspondent to 
that of the Gipseys. But they do not seeui tt 
hsBLYt considered bow extravagant a iurmise it is^ 
to believe a whole language an invention; tlntt 
txK> of people rud^f uncivihsed, and hundreds of 
miles distant from each other« This opinion is too 
absurd to.c employ more time to controvert it. 
Neither can the Gipsey language be admitted foir 
gibberish ; unless by those who know nothing of 
tile former, onr are totally ignotant of the latter, 
which it corrupt German ; whereas the foniier has 
setther German word% inflexions^ nor the least 
wSbmtf in sound« Ko GernMUv wope he flo üatm 

H 



84 - 

a whole day to a Gipsey conversation, would cotn^ 
prehend a single expression. A third party allow 
that the language of the original Gipseys was 
teally yernacular, and that of some country ; but 
assert it to be so disguised and falsified, partly 
by design of the Gipseys themselves, partly by 
adventitious events, through length of time, and 
ihe continual wandering of these people, that 
it is entirely new formed, and now used by the 
Gipseys only. This opinion contains much tratii ; 
but carries the matter too far,* in not allowing that 
any traces remain to prove any particular dialect 
to be the Gipseys' mother tongue. Perhaps the 
great Biisching means the same thing, when he 
»ays, " the Gipsey language is a mixture of corrupt 
" words from the Wallachian, Sclavonian, Hun- 
^ garian, and other pations*" Among these, the 
best-founded notion may be, that it is the dialect- 
of some particular country, though no longer so 
pure as in the country whence it originated. Thi6^ 
opinion meets the greatest concurrence of the 
learned: and will, we Jiope, be fully proved in 
another part of this book^ where the subject will 
be again discussed, more fully, in order to cor- 
roborate the other proofs of the orighi of this 
people« It will then be certified,, in what cctuntiy 
this is the native mother tongue. This is a p<Mnt 
concerning which most write» think differently. 
Sometimes the Gipseys are Hebrews^ then Nüp 



85 

InanSi Egyptians, Phrygians, Vandals, Sclavonic 
ans, or, as opinions vary,, perhaps &om6 other 
nation. 

It appears extraordinary, that the language of 
a people who have lived for centuries among us^ 
and has been matter of enquiry almost ever suice^ 
should still remain an affair of so much uncertainty« 
pipscys are to be found every-wherCj and might 
be very easily examined, as closely and often as 
any body pleased, about their language. It would 
have been attended with no great trouble, to have 
made so near an acquaintance as to bring them to 
converse with variety of people, 'and thereby, by 
means of comparison, to have attained some degree 
of certainty. This observation sounds plausibly; 
but on a closer examination the case is found to be 
very different. First, it is not so easy as people 
may^ imagine, to gain much' infoimation from the 
Gipseys concernmg their language. They arc 
suspicious, apprehending an explanation might le 
attended with danger to theinseUes; and are there- 
fore: not very communicative. To this must be 
added, their natural levity, and consequent seem- 
ing inattention to the questions put to them. A 
writer^ who had frequent experience of this be- 
haviour^ expresses himself to the following effect : 
<* Suppose any .person had an Jhclination to learn 
" the Gipsey language, he would find it very diffi- 
v^ cult to accomplish his purpose. Intercourse with 

H 2 



8ff 

^ these people is almost insuiferabte ; and very few 
^ of them have sense enough to teach any thki^ or 
" even to give a proper answer to a question. If 
*^ you ask about a single word, they chatter «> g^at 
^* many, which nobody can understand. Qthrrs 
^ have equally failed of success, not beii^ able, 
^^ by any means whatever, to obtain from thaai the 
** paternoster in their own language." Secondly! 
suppose the language of the Oipseys had been 
perfectly undei^tood soon after their arrival in 
Europe, variety of opinions would nevertheless 
have beeü maintained among the learned. It 
would still have been necessary, in order to asc6^ 
tain truth, to have revised tlie original languages 
of all the inhabitants both in and out of Europa 
or at least a general sketch of them. By such a 
review, the Gipseys* mother tongue might easily^ 
have been discovered. But many there are, as» 
Büttner, Schlozer, Gibelin, and Bachmeister, who 
have taken great pains in the minute iavestigi^tion. 
of the languages, as well Itö mannei^ of düFerent- 
people, and reekon those they have learned by 
dozens. How was it, indeed, powble ibr the 
learned of former centuries to be competent to the 
enquiry, as they hi^d not the aids which now ao 
copiously occur to the historical etymologist? 
Many dialects have been discovered^ and our 
knowledge of others greaüy increased, within the 
1 aft fifty or sixty years. During tlsat term^.thq 



treasut^s of the farthest north have been opened; 
and the most eastern idioms become more familiar 
to us : we even know ho>v the Otaheitian expresses 
himself. All this information did not exist before; 
knowledge in this science was much more con- 
fined than at this period : nor was it possible fbr 
the most Iteilied man, so circumstanced, to point 
out the country in which the Gipsey language 
was spoken« 

The Gipseys have no writings peculiar to thenv 
hi wliiph to express their language "*. Writing» or 
readings is, in. general,, a very uncommon accom«* 
plislmient with any of them; nor must either of 
these attainments be at all expected among the 
wandering sort. Sciences and the refined arts are 
never to be looked for amongst people whose 
manner of living and education are so irregular. 
Twiss does, indeed, mention, that the Spanish 
Gipseys have some knowledge of medicine and 
surgery ; but woe betide the person who conädefr 
in their skill ! It is absurd to suppose that thef 
are possessed of any secret for eictinguishing fire : 
superstition formerly gave the Jews .credit for this 
tat; in process of time, the Gipseys also were 
believed to be gifted with it Music is the^ only 

* tt is reported in Hungai-y, thftt a Öipsey alphftM Ss K)mts 
where preserved ; but nobody evtf has seen or ever will set it, 
for it probably never existed : as these people did ttot bring the 
art of writing from their own Country; ^htte they belong to a 
class of people who, by express laws^ ^ prohibited firon receiv« 
ing any kind of instruction. 



88 

science in M^hich the Gipseys participate, in any 
<:onsidcrable degree: they hkewise compose, but 
it is after the manner of the eastern people, extem- 
pore. In Wällachia, no other people possess this 
talent ; and, like the Italian improvisatorij they 
always accompany their verses with singing and 
music. The quality of the poetry of these ready 
composers may be appreciated when it is known 
that the rhyme is the part most considered : te 
accomplish this, they are frequently guilty of the 
most glaring solecisms in grammar ; besides their 
ideas are usually of the most obscene kind, and 
these expressed in the gross style of rude unpolished 
people. It is not necessary, therefore, to be a ma* 
ster, to hold their art in the greatest contempt*. 

* Poetry and Music are in equal esteem among the Transalpine 
WallachianSy who have consigned over these two amiable sisters 
to th« licentiousness of slaves-^Gipseys. These alone sing, play, 
thyme — for we cannot allow the appellation of poems to obsceae 
hobbling verses, put together at the momeqt. " By way of sampie 
ta|ie the following couplet: 

Jditidika^ Mitidika^ toten üng qxidtsch / 
JBa nUy ßa nUy n am tscke Jätsck, 
This tsche fdtschf which should be tscke sefak\ is a monstrous 
|>erversioQ of language. But the Gipsey wanted a rhyme for 
^fvatsck; so directly, with a bold pqetical licence, he changes 
the first person of the conjunctive for the third of the indicative 
mood. Tlixis this little composition, in question and answer, 
yif\ki^\k cl^puld be, 

JLJttle pne, Little one, come from thence ! 
|^o,.no, no, no, 1 have jiothing tQ do ( there Jr 
he change^ to, / Aave nothin^p vAai äo^o^f 



89 



CHAPTER XIII. 

Character and Capacities of the Gipseys ; whether 
Hhey are an Advantage or a Detriment to States. ■ 

Ihaoine a people of childish thoughts, whose 
minds are filled with raw indigested conceptions, 
guided more by sense than reason, and using un* 
derstanding and reflection only so far as they pro*, 
mote the gratification of any particular appetite;— 
and you have a perfect sketch of the general cha^ 
racterofthe Gipseys. 

They are lively ; uncommonly loquacious ; fickle 
to an extreme, consequently inconstant in their 
pursuits ; faithless to every body, even of their own 
caste ; void of the least emotion of gi*atitude, fre- 
quently returning benefits with the most insidious 
malice. Fear makes them slavishly compliant* 
when under subjection ; but having nothing to ap* 
prehend, like other timorous people, they are cruel. 
A desire of revenge often causes them to take the 

* Sulzer, with respect to their timidity, «ays : ** A Gipsey re» 
" quires to have been a long time in the army before he can meet 
*^ 9,n enemy's balls with decent soldier's resolution ; or to be an ex* 
^ pcricnced robber, before he can take a tiaveiler's purse, with* 
^ out having first, from a bush, either killed or disabled him.^ 
There is a proverb in Transylrania, that "You may drive fifty 
Gipsejs before you with a wet ra^.'* Thicknesse found the Gip^ 
fipyM exactly the mat m Spain 



9» 

most desperate resolutions. Thus they vowed no 
les« than death against a respectable German prince 
who died not many years ago, because, on account 
pf th^ir mi&detds, he had persecuted and driven 
them from his territories. They even weut so far 
aa to offer a reward among themselves (probably 
•omething considerable) to whoever would deliver 
Jgtim tq them, either alive or dead. Nor did they 
give lip this insolent design^ till some of ^m^ 
who talked loo openly about it in the Darmstacbb 
domiuioni), wiere taken, and being delivered up to 
the partiea concerned, paid the forfeit of their lives 
for their good intentions. 

To saich a degree of violence is their fury wne- 
times excited, that 2k mother has been known^ in 
the exeess of passion, to take her «mall in&nt by 
l^e feet, wbeii no othef instrument has really pre» 
tented, and therewith strike the ol^t of her angec 
They are so addicted ta drinkuig, as to saci ifico 
what is most necessary to them, that thsy may 
gratify their taste for spirituous liquors. They havQ 
likewise^ what one would little expect, an eaoenH 
ous sharQ pf vanity,, which is evidenced in their 
fondness for ftne clothes^ an4 their gait and de:» 
portment when dressed m them. It might he SHf>^ 
posed that this pride would have the good eflect of 
rendering the Gipsey cautious not to be guifty of 
such crimes as subject him to public shame ; hut here 
his levity of character is rendkied i;Q)i^|MCiM»Ub. im 



91 

he nercr looks either to the right or to the left in 
his transactions ; and though his conceit and pride 
are somewhat humbled during the time of punish- 
ment» and while the consequent pain lasts, these 
being over, he no longer remembers his disgrace^ 
but entertains quite as good an opinion of himself 
fts before. The Gipsers are loquacious and quafrel* 
«ome in the highest degree, though they seldom 
make much noise in their huts, in which they gene- 
rally keep quiet enough : but in the public markets, 
And before alehouses, where they are surrounded by 
a number of spectators, they bawl, spit at each other 
^«-catch up sticks and cudgels, vapour and brand* 
ish them ONner their heads— throw dust and dirt — 
BOW f un from each other, then back again, with 
furious gestures and threats. The women scream, 
xirag their husbands by force from the scene of ac«* 
tion ; these Iveak from them again, and return to 
it»: the children, too, howl piteously. Alter a 
•hort time, without any person's interferene^ 
iMrhen they have cried and made a noise till they 
sae tired, and without either party having received 
any personal injury, the affair finishes itself, and 
4^y. srpanrte, with as miuch ostentation as if they 
had performed the most heroic feats. 

^ Tkus the Qipscy seeks honour ! of which his 
Mem seldom jßoincide with those of other pMpIe, 
and Bometimes deviate entirely from propriety : w« 

fm^ ^iämt£om fmsf% whataU, wlio have made ofc* 



99 

servations on these people agree in, that honour 
and shame are to them totally indilfferent We es- 
tablish this decision by comparing Gipsey notions 
with our own ; trying their dealings and conduct 
by this standard, they will often appear ridiculous, 
frequently even infamous. 

Nothing can exceed the unrestrained depravity 
of manners existing among these j)eople; particu- 
larly the softer sex. Unchecked by any idea of 
shame, they give way to every desire. The mo- 
ther endeavours, by the most scandalous arts, to 
train her daughcer for an offering to sensuality; 
and the latter is scarcely grown up, before she 
becomes the seducer of others. Let the dance, for- 
merly mentioned, be called to mind ; it will then 
be unnecessary to adduce fresh examples, of which 
regard for decency will not permit a detail. 

Their indolence has been already quoted. Lazi- 
ness is so natural to them, that were they to subsist 
by their own labour only, they would hardly have 
bread for two of the seven days in the week* 
This disposition increases their propensity to stew- 
ing and cheating-^the common attendants on idle- 
ness. They seek and avail themselves of every op- 
portunity to satisfy their lawless desires, Thoma* 
sius endeavours to propagate a notion, . that this ha 
bit has grown upon the latter Gipseys by degrees, 
in opposition to the practice of those who first ar- 
rived, quoting Stumpf for bis authoiity, who tttlk« 



93 

of Christian discipline and order among the original, 
Gipseys; he assures us, too, that they paid ready 
money for all they wanted.; but this testimony does 
not deserve attention : the Gipseys in Stumprs time 
Were the same as they are at this day, nor are they 
differently described by any of the old writers. 

This is a lamentable enumeration of evil ami 
ruinous prq>erties in the Gipsey s character, which 
applies not only to a few individuals, but to by far 
the greatest number of these people. Scarcely any 
virtue could exist in a soul so replete with vices- 
What at first sight appears less censurable, or per- 
haps eyen amiable, in them is, their habitual cor* 
tent in their situation.' They have no care about 
futurity ; they are unacquainted either with anxiety 
or solicitude : and pass through every day lively 
and satisfied. . But this, in itself commendable re- 
signation, is as little to be accounted a. virtue 
among the. Gipseys as among the Iroquois, and 
proceeds from the excessive levity of their dis- 
positions. 

Let us now take a view of the natural qualities» 
and capacities, of the Gipseys. Here they will ap- 
pear to advantage. Observe them at whatever em^ 
ployment you may, there always appear sparks of 
genius. It is well known, and no writer omits to 
remark, what artful curious devices they have re 
course to in perpetrating any cheat or robbery : but 
(hia is not the only particular in which th^y shew 



94 

brains and capacity. The following cxttact ffom 
an Hungarian author, who was an attetitive ob- 
server of these people, contains corroborating 
instances : 

' " The Gipseys," he says, " have a fertile imagina- 
•* tion in their way, and are quick and ready at ex- 
" pedients, so that in many serious doubtful cases 
" they soon recollect how to act,' in order to extri- 
•• cate themselvÄ. We cannot, indeed, helpwon- 
•• dering, when we attend to and consider the skill 
^* they display in preparing and bringing their works 
•* to perfection, which is the more necessary, frofti 
•* the scarcity of proper tools and apparatus. They 
" are very acute and cunning in cheating or thiev- 
^* ing : and when called to account, for 4ny fraud or 
** robbery, fruitful in invention and persuasive in 
" their arguments to defend themselves.*" 

At Debrezin, as well as at other schools in 
Hungary and Transylvania, there have been several 
lads admitted for instruction. Cleverness is ob- 
servable in all, with no despicable talents for study. 
If another proof should be wanting, let us advert 
to their skill in music. That no Gipsey has ever 
signalised himself in literature, notwithstanding, 
according to the foregoing accounts, many of them 
have partaken of the instruction to be obtained at 
pnbiic schools, i^ no contradiction to the point in 
i{uestion. Their volatile disposition and uAsteadi- 
iiess wU( not allow tbem to complete any thing 



which requires perseverance or application. Frc-t 
quently the bud perishes before it blow3 ; or if it 
proceed %o far that fruit appears, it commonly falls 
off and rots ere it attains maturity. In the midst 
of his career of learning, the recollection of his 
origin seises him ; a desire arises to return to, what 
he thinks, a more happy manner of life ; this soli'» 
citude increases; he gi^l^s up all at once, turns 
back a^in^l and consigns over his knowledge to 
oblivion. Such is the reason why the Gipsey race 
has never produced a learned man, nor ever will so 
long as the^e principles are retained» ~ 

It appears certain that the Gipseys are not de* 
fielen t in capacity ; and it seems equally, decided 
that they have throughout a wicked depraved turn 
of mind. Their skill and ingenuity might render 
them very profitable subjects to the state, but their 
disposition makes them the most useless pernicious 
beings. They are not fit for agriculture, nor any 
Mher art which requires industry ; on the cimtrary« 
they are bnrthensome fVom their begging, they do 
mischief by their various impositions, besides, being 
thieves and robbers, they destroy the security of a 
state. The goldwashers, in Transyh^ania and tlie 
Banat, are the only considerable exceptions ; these 
Gipseys are considered the best of the caste ; they 
have no intercourse with those of their own nation» 
nor do they like to be called Gipsej^, but Bras«* 
eben, and in the Hungarian language Aratufosz 



96 

(gold collectors). Their employment not beingf 
profitable, they are generally poor a^d necessitous; 
yet seldom beg, and it is still more rare for them 
to steal. Content with their scanty subsistence, 
they sift gold sand in summer ; in winter they 
make trays and troughs, which they sell in an 
honest way» These properties render them, not 
only harmless, but serviceable to goverment; as 
they annually produce large sums, which, but for 
them, would remain in the earth. What pi^ it is, 
that so small a part should be well inclined, in pro- 
portion to the multitude, in Transylvania and else- 
where, who live in the manner above described! 
There remains perhaps one more profession» in 
which a state n)ight reap advantage from the Gip^ 
seys, viz. that of a military life. This seems to be 
doubted in Spain, as no Gipsey there, even were he 
so inclined, can become a soldier. In other coun* 
tries, people think differently. For example, in 
the two Hungarian regiments, the Orosaish and the 
Julaisli, nearly every eighth man is a Gipsey. la 
order to prevent either them or any other persons 
from remembering their descent, it is ordered by 
government, that as soon as a Gipsey joins the 
regiment, he is no longer to be called by that ap* 
pellation. Here he is placed, promiscuously with 
other men ; and by this wise regulation, may be 
systematically rendered useful. But whether he 
would be adequate to a soldier s station, unmixed 



97 

with strangers, in the company of his equals cnily; 
is very doubtful. His healthy robust body, active 
on every occasion; at the same time so inured to 
hardship, that he can defy hunger, thirst, heat, 
cold, and other inconveniences; makes him , ex- 
tremely well qualified for a military life : on the 
other hand, his innate properties seem incompatible 
with his profession, and he has little of the essen- 
tial requisite for a serviceable soldier. How could 
a regiment composed of people without heart or 
courage, who would be overcome with fear and 
dismay on the least appearance of danger, who 
would give up every thing, and only think of 
saving themselves by flight, ever perform any great 
action? Or how could we expect, from their levity, 
and unspeakable want of foresight, that they should 
avail themselves to the utmost of any advantage 
with proper precaution and judgment ? The follow- 
ing incident, taken from the Hungarian annals, 
•may serve as proof, whether this suspicion be or 
be not well founded. — In the year 1557, during 
the troubles in Zapoly, the castle of Nagy Ida, in 
the county of Abauywar, was in danger of being 
besieged and taken by the imperial troops. Francis 
von Perenyi, who had the command, being short 
of men, was obliged to have recourse to the Gip- 
seys, of whom he collected a thousand ; these he 
furnished with proper means of defense, and sta- 
tioned them in the outworks, keeping his own 



small compliment of men to garrison the citadel 
The Gipseys imagined that they should be per* 
fectly free from annoyance behind their entrencb* 
ments, and therefore went courageously to their 
posts. Every thing was in order when the enemy 
arrived, and the storm commenced. The Gipseys» 
behind their fortifications, supported the attack 
with so much more resolution than was expectied, 
returning the enemy's fire with such alacrity, that 
the assailant^ little suspecting who were the de* 
fendants, were actually retreating. They had 
hardly quitted their ground, when the conq^ieiors» 
elated with joy on their victory, crept out of their 
holes, crying after tliem, " Go and be banged, 
** you rascals ! Thank God we had no more powder. 
*' and shot, or we would have played the Tery 
'' devil with you ! "— " What ! " replied the retiring 
besiegers, as they turned about, and, to their great 
astonishment, instead of regular troops, discovered 
a motley Gipsey tribe, " are you the heroes! is it so 
" with you!" immediately wheeling about to the 
left, sword in hand, they drove the btack crew 
back to their works^ forced their way after, and in 
a few minutes totally subdued tliem. Thus the af- 
fair ended. In this manner Gipseys would fire- 
qiiently trifle away by heedlessness, what they 
nvight have secured by good f(Htuae and alacrity» 
if they were permitted to act m separate corp& 
There are many instances recorded in the amiah 



Oi7 

« 

of former centuries^ of Gipseys having been em- 
ployed in military expeditions : but seldom, or ra- 
ther never, were they thought of as soldiers. At 
Crupa, 1565, they prepared cannon balls for the 
Turks: still earlier, in 1496, they served Bishop 
Sigismund at Fiinfkirchen in the same manner. In 
the thirty-years war, the Swedes likewise had a 
body of Gipseys in their army. And when, in 
1686, Hamburgh was besieged by the Danes, there 
were three companies of them in the Djanish army* 
Their destination was not so much to stand to their 
arms, as to perform other services ; they were 
chiefly employed in %ing parties, to burn, plun- 
der, or lay waste, the enemy's country. As these 
are the operations most suitable to their genius, 
they are now by the Turks destined to such pt:r- 
poses, and incorporated with the Sains Serdenjesci^ 
and Nephers. 

Such is the assistance which has hitherto been 
derived from the Gipseys in war ; whence we ex- 
perience the possibility of their being rendered 
serviceable, although the strict watch necessary, to 
be kept over them, on account of their propensity 
to be guilty of excesses and irregularities, would 
be. exceedingly troublesome. 

But, in order to bring the advantages and disad- 
vantages attending them to a fair discussion, it 
2nust not be forgotten, that at the very time one 
part of these peopU might be rendered beneficial, 

I 



90 

^t. in tim6 of War, anothdr part would liave it 
m their p6Wer to do more mischief; by reason of 
the disordfef which then prevails, whcin the relaxed 
ittentioii of the magisti-ates makes them more 
daring iii f heir depredations. Besides, what |s still 
worse, thiey are very convenient for the enemy to 
use äs machines for treachery. What they Avere 
in former times accustomed to practise very com- 
monly, they stijl continue whenever they have an 
oppoftiinity. 'I'hey have been generally decried, 
in early ages, äs traitors and spies : perhaps this ac- 
cusation may be too fat extended, but it is not 
without foundation, A Gipsey possesses all the 
properties required to render him a fit agfent to ht 
femployed in traitorous undertakings. Being neces- 
sitous, he is easily corrupted ; and.his misconceived 
ambition and pride persuade him that he thus be- 
comes a person of consequence : he is at thfe samfe 
time too inconsiderate to rfeflect oh danget ; and, 
artful to the greatest degreci, works his Way under 
the most difficult circumstances. 

Thiis accusation may be proved by more tfaanont 
instance.-— Count Eberhard, öfWirtemberg, with a 
train of forty people, made a pilgrittiage to Palda- 
tlne in the year 1468 : and,, as Crusius says, fell 
into the hands of the Sultan of Egypt, through the 
treachery of the Gipseys. Further, during the trou- 
bles excited by John Zapblya, in Hüngary, in the 
sixteenth centuiy, sundry spies and delegated m* 



91 

cfftidiiff !« wert taken, ' Whfch proved to be Gipseyft 
In '^lÖÖSf Count j^^ta, the impefial ^neral, who 
heil^^ed the city of feisfrritz in Transylvania, when 
he -Ranted to circulate a fetter anwrng the beMged, 
effected ft by means of a- Gipity. - ' 

TWiüfty hänhe bein si(^etimes -stiH more clangietDns 
to a country, by harbouring otlier spies, i who, 
tiiidbr'TtHe disgürsi^'öf 0?psey8, *n]ade «kcursionSy 
sdfWej^'^ Vitien* ätirt' Cötititriea, witlioüt being nb- 
afced: •''An' Ö*artipte'bf ihis^ind is recited in the 
j^tffreiiturÄ' df ä 'certain French engineer; Pefier 
Durois ; which is a circumstance, in the records of 
Louis XIV. perhaps as much unknown as it' is re- 
markable. It relates, that at Padock (Patak), in 
Upper Hungary, a great fire happened, through 
the carelessness of the Gipseys ; by which not only 
the little city adjoining the fort was burnt, but the 
beautiful Bruderhoff was also reduced to ashes : oii 
which occasion seven supposed Gipseys were takeii^ 
into custody, one of whom was the French engiiieer 
above mentioned. This person had travelled about. 
with them during nine years : he had sketches^ of 
all the principal fortifications in the whole ^iVonian 
empire, and the imperial hereditary dominions 
|aken in the most concise manner, ^ifnh remarks 
where each place was least defensi,\>le. — This aftair 
kas still another voucher, who says, '' in the month 
**of June of the year I676, the Gipseys fired this 
'* little city (Patak), together with the churchy 

12 



92 

^ With these Gipscys was found a French engineer^ 
*^ named Peter Durois, who had been nine years in 
^* this disguise» and received considerable remit- 
** tances from France. He was taken by^thfs impe- 
** rialists, and there were found upon him plans of 
*^ almost all the cities of Upper Hungary, and the 
" German empire." 

Thus these people, in whatcjycr point of view 
they are considered, are found to cause incalcula- 
ble damage and miscluef,. without, in general, re- 
turning the smallest profit or benefit to the state 
in which they reside. « 



\ 



9d 



CMAPTEa XIV. 



Cbncfrnihg the Toleration of the Gipseys by the 

liferent States of Europe. 

V - *■ ■ ' • . 

J^noMylhc inherent bad aod pernicious qualities of 
the Gipseys, the question ; arises, What a govern*' 
meat can do with them? The evil they occasion 
has lotBg« been a subject of serious consideration^ 
and various means . of security have beea devised. 
As banishment u'as a mode punishing formerly often 
resorted to, nothing could be more natural than 
that it should Hkewise.be exercised against the 
Gipseys» The clerg*y and politicians inveighed 
strongly, against the itpleration of these people ;, ^ 
and their exile was actually resolved upon in most 
countries of Europe, . . rv . 

About the end of the. fifteenth centuryi their 
persecntk>n commenced in Spain. . King Ferdinand, 
who esteemed it a good work tp expatriate useful 
and profitable subjects-^Jews, and even Moorish 
families — could much less be guilty of an impro^ 
priety in laying h^nds on the mischievous progeny 
of the Gipseys. The edict for their extermination 
was published in the year 1492* But^ instead of ^ 
passing the boundaries,., they sl^nk into hiding- 
places, and shortly after appeared ^ery*\vhere ip >s 4- 
great numbers as before. The emperor Charles V. 



^ 4 



^ 



Ö4 

persecuted them afresh; as did Philip IL also. 
Since that time they have nestled in again, and 
were left unmolested till about' twenty years ago, 
when they were threatened, with another stormy 
but it blew over, without taking effect "^^ ' *' 

In France, Francis I. passed an edict for their 
ek|)uhion ; and at the äs^e^mUly ' of the Stätes^of 
Orleans, in 1561, all goi^mom: >of dties > n?ocivTd 
o4*dersta drive them away With fire ^d«word. 
Nfeverthetess, in* protess of tirtietbeyihad oottected 
again, 2ta4 rnci'eäsed to such a dieg^ee^ l^hat ta 
1^1"^ a. haw order came out for their eKtermibfr* 

tion.' ,.-■'.. ■ -. . :i.r.' 

"In Italy, their situation ha^ been ecfnally pre- 
carious. In the year i 1Ö72 they were compeUed to 
retire from the territoriles' cä* 'Milan and Parma; 
a;nd ut a period someVirhar ^^Ärii^r • they ' were ^chased 
beyond the Venetian jurisdiction; ».*... 

"^England first endeaVoufed ^0 disburthen itielf 
of theni in- the year 1531, undi^r Henry Vill : but 
as^' the act paai^d for that* purpose fell into <lis« 
re^rd,* a tiew one was published in the reign: of 
TEfizabeth. * 

• They ' wfere 'not allo^red thef 'privilege of nemam«- 
ftjgontnolested'in Denmark, as' the code of Danish 
laws ^specifics : " The7artarsf(Gipseys) who wander 
*^ about evcry>Where, doing great damage to the 
J^teople, by their lieh, «hefts, and witchcraü^ 



H 



V . . i c 



A " •■ -^ .- ^.*.. - . .... ^^t ^ 



9S 
^.Adü he taken into custody by imry jnngis 

Sweden has not been more favburnbl^ having at 
three iliffierent times attacked them. A very sharp 
order for their .explusion.canie out in the year l66i. 
Thejdiet of 1733 published a second: and that of 
4727 repeated the foregoing, with additional M«* 
ir«rity. 

They were excluded from .the iNetheidandi 
under pain .of death, partly iby /Charles V. and 
partly afterwards by »die ^United Provinces in 
15b£. 

OPinally, the greatest number of sentences of 
exile 'have been pronounced against them ia 
Germany. As well imperial decrees, as those of 
-particular princes, have been repeatedly issued^ 
for removing these people. The beginning was 
made, under Maximilian I. at the Augsburgh diet 
in 1600; where the following article was drawn 
up: ^^ Respecting those people who call themselves 
" Gipseys, roving up and down tlje , country **HBy 
^^public edict, to all ranks. of. the. empire, accord» 
f^ ing to the obligations .under which they art 
^>bound to Us and the Holy i£mpire, it- is^trictly 
'^ordered, that iniuturethe}^donotpermitthe said 

Gipseys (since there is authentic evidenoe^of their 



jN 



^ ibeing. spies, iScout8,.aad conveyers, of inteUigence, 
'' betraying the Christians to the Turks) to pass or 
fmxiaixi within their territories, ^or to. trade or 



$8 

}k ac^c^ted when no other can be efficacious 
Though it be pioved that the Gipseys had occa* 
sioned ever so much mischief, it was not impossible 
that they liiight ceasie to be such pernicious beings ; 
at least there had never been any trial made, by 
H^hich this impossibility could be ascertained« 
Men may hß formed to any thing. Had proper 
means been used for their civilisation, it is highly 
probable the event would have proved tliat they 
were not incapable of becoming better. If several 
Gipsey^ at different times, have voluntarily emerg- 
ed from their savageness, how much more likely 
is it that the remainder might have been altered, 
had they received such aids as their necessities 
required ? — But expelling the Gipscys entirely was 
not merely a premature step ; it was, 
. Thirdly, a wasteful one. This may perhaps 
appear strange, but is indisputable, so long as the 
state ma^pm holds good — ^that a numerous popula- 
tion iß the most advantageous. It is allowed 
that a state would not lose any thing by the 
Gipseys, as Gipseys; on the contrary, it would 
be a gainer, because an obstacle to the general 
^welfar^e ^puld be ^removed: but this is not the 
matter in question« If the Gipsey do not know 
how to make use of the faculties with which nature 
baft V endowed him; let the state teach. .him, and 
keep him in leading-strings till theend;i9 attained. 
And though the root of thisi depravity li« to dsep^ 




äff 

tfaht fib tsannot be removed iii the £rstgen?ratioi^ 
a continuation of the same c^re will, in the aecond 
anÜrvtlürd'desc'eiut, l^ sure ;of meeting its xewaird. 
Now let us 4:eflect; on s^jGipsey when he haä.dis- 
oontinued>bij8i..v^i^a.nt mode of Hving-^consider 
him^with his ^undity and immerous family, who 
by being reforuK^d are niade useful citizens^^^and 

9 

we, sha4 jierceive hgw. great a want of economy 
it .WB& to ithrow: him .^way as dros& 

^Nearly the same idea has occurred toodjier au*^ 
thora; at ; least tliey m far agree in what has been 
idvaiiiced, that they advise rendering the Gipseys 
uscifiil : only the means they recommend are liable 
to powerful objections. They think tlie state might 
make public slaves, or penitentiaries, of these peo«* 
pie, and put them to all kinds of work. But such 
ckrpendants; even supposing them to be employed 
in the most beneficial, way, are always a quisanoe 
and burthen; to a state. :Be$ides, in the above 
scheme,* therok no proposal made for the bettering 
these people: they must, therefore, remain under 
the restraint ndi convicts, from generation to gene* 
ration. fAnd^ if allowed, to increase, what could 
be done at last with this multitude and their brood? 
Would not whole districts be required, merely tQ 
turn the 'thousands of these wretches into ? More^ 
over, what an expense and inconvenience to super- 
mt^nd thent! Plausible, therefore, as that proposal 



im 

appears at the first glanc^,^ little will it stand Üi€ 
test of a closer examination. ^ 

Banishment was not the proper method to be 
adopted ; nor would it have been adViseable to 
make them penitentiaries or galley-slaves: but care 
should have been taken to enlighten their under- 
standings, and to mend their hearts. 

However, what has been hitherto omitted, «there 
is still time enough to execute. Fcrw, or scarcely 
any, of the larger states are so entirely cleared of 
Gipseys, that these people may not here and tliere 
be found by hundreds, in most countries by thou* 
sands. The periods when the first sentences of ba- 
nishment were pronounced, were too unphiiosophi- 
cal for any preferable mode of punishment to be 
suggested : but it may be expected, from a more 
informed ^ge, that better maxims will be adopted. 
tTe send apostles to the East and West, to the most 
distant partä of the earth, and, as will be hei^after 
shewn, into the very country whence the Gipsej-s 
tnigtsttedy in order to instruct the people who knpw 
not God. Is it not inconsistent for men to be soli- 
citous for the welfare of their fellow^creatures in 
distant regions, and to throw off and leave to 
chance those who, equally wretchied, have brought 
their errors home to us .^ If it be a good work^ to 
teach« religion and virtue to such as are ignorant of 
their Creator, why not begin with thoise nearest to 



101 

us? especially as neglect, in this particular, is at^ 
tended with detriment to society in general. The 
Gipseys have been lon^ enough among civilised 
people, to prove that they will not be allured, by 
the mere example of others, to free themselves 
from the fetters of old customs and vices. In 
ord^r to accomplish that end,, foreign and more 
efiectual hßlp is requisite. It were v^,in tp hope for 
any considerable progress with those who are grown 
up ; it would be sufficient, by compulsion, to make 
them quit their unsettled manner, of life, and, by 
iii$tniction and teaching, to convey a glimmering 
of light to their understanding, and produce some 
amelioration of the heart Proper care being taken 
of the educatipn of the children, society would be 
more likely to have its endeavours crowned with 
success. .\ . 



1 , . 



, i. 



lOS 



• ' Vi 



. ' f 



tnAtTTM xy. ' -i-: 



» 



' . 



JEssap on the Improvement oftheGipm^. 



I. 



It would be a Tamentafcle <iaSe, if tifie befert- 
mentionetl regrutatiohs were iricrely piöiis' üHsftte 
Les m hope something bfetter 1 Thei't<Ht*l^ Ms b^eal 
commenced; — a great* empress, Theresjli lairf down 
a plan to.vViu over these poor uiiforhniate ptjopl* 
to virtue'iaLYid the state. B6t it fe to be UPgretted, 
that the execution of her wise dispostfroiis» re^c^ 
ing ithe Gipseys in Hüngary, seems! to natve beM 
entrusted to people iriadequatie to the task. 

What was done, in her time, towätds the aceom^ 
plishment of this work, may be seen by tHe-folkw* 
ing article, extracted from the Niewspaper already 
often quoted, called Anzeigen aus den Kayserl 
Kmigl. Erbidndern (Intelligence from the Heredi- 
tary Imperial Royal Dominions) : " Since the year 
" 1768, several decrees regarding these people have 
been published in the country (Hungary), and 
the strictest orders dispatched to the several dis- 
tricts in consequence. They were prohibited from 
** dwelling in huts or tents ; from wandering up 
** and down the country ; from dealing in horses ; 
** from eating animals which died naturally, and 
'^ carrion ; and from electing their own wayda or 



U 



"•^judgö. it was intended to extirpate the very 
** name arid language of these folks, out of the 
** couritry. If hey were no longer to be called Gip- 
** seys, but New Boors (Uj Magyar) ; not to con- 
*^ verse any longer with each other in their own 
^* language, but in that of any of the countries in 
** which they had chosen to reside. Some months 
*' were to be allowed, * after which time they were 
•* to quit their Gipsey manner of life, and settle, 
** like the other inhabitants, in cities or villages ; 
** to build decent houses, and follow some reputa- 
** ble business. They were to procure boors' cloth- 
*' ing, to commit themselves to the protection of 
"some territorial superior, and live regularly. 
" Such as' were fit for soldiers, to be enlisted into 
" regiments.*' Nevertheless, although these regula- 
tions were calculated entirely for the good of these 
people and the ^tate, the greatest part were not 
in the smallest degree benefited by them. The 
effect which was produced gave occasion, in the 
year 1 77 3| for these orders not only to be rejJeated; 
bu^'made more rigid; and as even this measure 
would not answer the end, it was then thought 
necesisary to proceed to extremity with them. 
Wherefore it was ordered. That no Gipsey should 
have permission to marr}'-, who could not prove 
himself in condition to support a wife and child- 
ren: that from such Gipseys who had families, 
the children should be taken away by force, re 



104 

moved from tlieir parents, relations, and intercourse 
with the Gipsey race, to have a bett^er education 
given them. A beginning was made in some 
places ; and where they would not comply volua^ 
tarily, they were compelled to submit to the decree. 
At Fahlendorfin Schutt, and in the district of Press- 
burg, all the children of the New Boors (Gipseys) 
above five years old, were carried away in waggons 
during the night of the 21st of December, 1773, 
by overseers appointed for that purpose ; in order 
that, at a distance from their parents or relations, 
they might be more usefully educated, and become 
accustomed to work. Those boors who were 
willing to receive and bring up these children, 
were paid eighteen guilders yearly from govern- 
ment On the 24th of April, 1774, between five 
and si^ o'clock in the morning, the children of 
the Gipseys, which had been growing up from 
December of the foregoing year, were again re- 
moved from Fahlendorf in Schutt and Hideghid, 
for the purpose of being put under the same course 
of discipline as the others. Among the children 
taken away on this occasion, was a ^ girl fourteen 
years old, who was forced to submit tp be Carried 
off in her bridal state. She tore her hair for grief 
and rage, and w^s quite beside herself with agita- 
tion: but she recovered a composed state of mind; 
and» in 1776, in Fasching, obtained permission' 
to accomplish her marriage» 



im 

So far our intelligence quoted from the Gazettes j 
t>y which we may see. how prudently eyery thing 
was concerted. It is. true, the means; here used 
we comjmlsory; but such measures were necessary, 
und the only ones capable of insuring success* 
Moreover, it may at the .same time Jbe observed, 
although the publisher of this information endea- 
vours to conceal it, how little these salutary regula- 
tions 'were put in force: there were scarcely two 
places* in the kingdom j where even an endeavour 
5vas made to give them proper effect. This 
mpineness niusthävc been unknown to the emperor 
Joseph, or he would certainly haye again enforced 
them, to all chiefs and governors, at the same time, 
that he gave oitlers^ for their being observed in 
rransylvania. i ' 

The tenor of the decree just mentioned, which 
«ras published in the year 1782, was consonant 
ivith the intention of Theresa with regard to the 
Hungarian Gipseys, namely, that those also in 
Transylvania should become better, men, and more 
iseful inhabitants. For the accomplishment of 
i/vhich, it prohibits their wandering about and 
iving under tents; requires that they become 
settled, and put themselves under some territorial 
:hief In order to strike immediately at the root 
)f the evil, necessary and minute directions arb 
jiven for the improvement of their religious ideas 

K 



M6 

uSä eptnioM» mmi^ byeoirectiiig iimr Tiaoui 
faÜMts, for^renderaig then good 
'^intj with mpcct to fdi^on, tbcy 

1. 'Not ^cmly be taugkt Ac prin c ip le » of 
ligion themselvciy hülsend tfaeir.duldicii 
eariy to school : 
<f/^Pirv€nt, as much aspossibk^ dicir child- 
ren from Tvaanmg about naked, in .tho 
house, the roads, and sticeti^ thcrdby 
^giviDg offiense and itisgnst to -otbcF 
people: 
:9. In their dwdUngs, not pcimit. their: child- 
ren to sleep piamiscuously by each other, 
without distinction of sex : 
^4. 'Diligently attend at cjiurch, . particularly 
on Sundays and holidays, to. give proof 
^of their Christian disposition : 
^5. Put themselves under the giudance of 
'Spiritual/ teachers, and conduct themselves 
oMiformably to the rules laid down» by 
them. 
Secondly, with« r^fard to. their tempoial conduct 
and better mode of living, th^. are bound 

L To conform to the custom, of: the . comnti^^ 

in^ diet, dress, >and language : oonsc^qpiently 

to abstain from feeding on cattle which 

>havediedaf distempers ; not ta go «about 

.in «uch .unseemly. dresses; jand.to 



X 

I 



5W7 

«cmtiimerthc .H/se ,i)f (tb^ir.A^ 
knguage: 
. .«. Not to appear Any n)Qre in ilarge <5k>äKs, 
' which «are iOhiQay u^qfi^lto fhjde itbiiigs 
Ahat^ve fbeen ^stolen^ 
18. iNo •Giipsey, jQxcept;he ;hc ja igql^wwber* 
v; .^jihftlltkeepja.boiBe: 2^1$o.4l^,gQ}Ä^afib^^^ 

4. Must; refrain ffom, jiU ;Hm4s ,pf Ji>a]ft^ri^ 

at the annual f^ifs. 

5. The magistrates of every place must be very 

attentive, that.no Gipsey waste his time 
in idleness: but at those seasons when 
they have no employment, either for 
themselves or any landholder, recom- 
mend them to some other person, with 
whom they shall be compelled to wotk 
for hire. 

6. They are to be kept^ particularly, to agricul- 

ture; therefore 

7. It is to be observed, where possible, that 

every territorial lord who takes any Gip- 
seys under his jurisdiction, do allot them a 
certain piece of ground to cultivate : 

8. Whoever is remiss in his husbandry, shall 

be liable to corporal punishment : 

9. They shall only be permitted to amuse 

themselves with music, or other things, 
.when there is no field work to be done. 
SvLch were the regulations wisely adopted by the 

K 8 



108 

empieror Joseph, for the purpose of civilising, and 
rendering good and profitable citizens, upwards 
of eighty thousand miserable wretches, ignorant 
of God and virtue. It must be regretted that 
similar measures have not been used in the other 
countries of Europe, where these people still remain 
wandering in error, and scarcely deservisg to be 
considered as human beings. \ 



r 



V 



^ 109 



.'- •• 



; ^ SECTION 11. 



OK THE ORIGIN OF THE CiPSEYS. 



CHAPTER I. 

The first Appearance of Gipseys in Europe. 

No record is to be found, stating in what year, or 
in what part of Europe, Gipseys made their first 
appearance. But it is to be premised, what will 
afterwards be investigated, that they did not ori- 
ginate in our quarter of the globe ; on the con- 
trary, that they strayed hither, as oriental strangers, 
cither from Egypt, Asia Minor, or some other part: 
we shall then examine, whether it be not possible, 
by means of what is related in old writings con- 
cerning the first observance of them in difFereiit 
countries, to follow the track so as to ascertain 
where and when they first , set foot on European 
ground. 

Mention is made of them in Germany so early 
as the year 1417j when they appeared in the vici- 
nity of the North Sea. A year afterwards we find 
them ^Iso in Switzerland and the country of the 
Grisons. In 14S2 they likewii^e appeared in Italy» 



It is unknovm what was the earliest period at 
which they were observed m^ France and Spam : 
but their appearance in these countries must have 
heen of later date than in Germany, as is proved 
''in respect to France, by the name Bohemiatis^ 
which they bear there. In regard to Spain, Cor- 
dova, in order to contradict some surmises about 
the Gipseys' mother country, uses the argument, 
that they were known in Germany prior to either 
Spain or Italy. The French make' the first ihen- 
tion of them in 1427, when they straggled about 
raris, having arrived there on the' 17th day 6f 
August in that year. 

From what country did they dotrie into' 6fcV-' 
many? — IVfuratori thinks, froiti Italy: biit how un- 
founded this opinion is, appears clearly from their 
coming to that country after they had been in 
Germany. The Bologna Chronicle ascertains the? 
time when IraJy tecame acquainted with thdst 
people. The horde therein mehtipned, Which ^- 
rived in that city on the 18th of July, 1422^, coü- 
sisted of about a hundred men ; whose leader's; ö^ 
(as they called him) duke's, name^ was Andt'ää^l 
They travelled from Bologna to Forli, intending^ to 
proceed to pay the Pope a visit at Rpnie. Mura- 
tpri founds his judgment on this chronicle^ not 
knowing xhat Gipseys are spoken of in the Gerihäti 
prints five years earlier. 

Still less true is what Majolus asserts, t^ät tli^ 



, Ml 

caxne from Spain, atid first entered» th& Germain 
tcrritoritt^iti the year 1492^ wlrea they, were driven^ 
otftof Spain by Ferdinand the Catholic Hungary) 
i» certainly the country whence they came iuta- 
Gemiany.^ Not only the time cDnfirms this con-» 
Jecture, a» we find them in Hungary in 14^17 9 the 
very same* year in which they were first observed^ 
iit Germany, but Aven tin- expresslyr mentions Hunr 
gai^ among the countries^ftom which he su{^osear 
ifeem to come. 

1x1 this state our examination rests, in reg^d ta 
whether they came immediately into Germany^ Q£ 
first? appeared stationary in some other, place. . 

That Poland should be the country w^bichr har^ 
böured the first Gipseysi and that theyr sgread 
/ thence into Wallachia, Transylvania, and other 
countries, is a mere arbitrary Surmise. The writejc 
(J. G. £ccard).who advances this opinion,, r^geals 
10:* Miinster's intelligence^ but that, fioea^ not cqq^ 
tain a syllable iri confirmatipa of it,. Others,, with 
the greatest confidence, maintain, that. Wallatdiia 
and Moldavia, where they also wandered about in 
1417^^^^^ places in. which, theig made their fimt 
appearance in Europe. Cantemir, oa the <;:Qntrai^ 
isjvery undecided,. saj;ing> ''Whence,, or at what 
'' time,, thi»* nation arrived iQ> M^ldavia^, neither 4p 
" they know thanselves nor is tiberc^ anjf raentioQ 
'' made; in^ pur annual* publications" Hqwqyjsm,, tbs 
lectond of^iniMf seems to ap^roadar ^ci^ neai; tlie 



112 

truth, but does not point out the particular pro- 
vince in which the Gipseys were first observed ;• — 
Of what use would that be? But one information, 
compared with other circumstances, is of so, much 
assistance here, that we may, \yithout hesitation, 
pronounce Turkey to be the country whence these 
eastern guests found their way to us. This is pro- 
bable — First, because Aventin expressly makes 
Turkey their original place of rendezvous : second- 
ly, as this explains why the southrcast parts of 
Europe are most crowded with Gipseys, as before 
stated (vide p. 7). It happened in Turkey, as in 
every otlier place through which they passed, that 
many of these wanderers remained behind; now, 
as all that came to Europe passed by this route, 
whether at once or in different divisions, it was 
possible, indeed a necessary consequence, that a 
greater number should continue here, than in the 
different countries where their hordes were much 
divided and diminished. 

The time when they arrived, has been as little 
certified, as the particular place where they landed. 
Perhaps, the before-quoted chronicle of Bologna 
may afford some insight into this matter. It re- 
lates, as appears by the context, from the mouth 
of the leader of the horde which it describes, that 
these people had been five years wandering about 
in the world, previously to their arrival at Bologna, 
JJowi if this account is to be depended on, they 



113 , - 

<annot have arrived in Europe earlier than the year 
1417. But before attaching credit to this relation, 
we are to consider, whether the ,author of it l^t 
deserving of credit. To place any confidence in 
Gipsey narrations, in"* general, would be very 
imprudent; as there are too many proofs that their 
sayings are mere nonsense, and contradictory 
prattle: but the case in question seems to be an 
exception. All the inconsistency and falshoods 
which theGipseys reported, concerning whence they 
cauie, with the reasons for their wandering, have 
an end in view. But with regard to time, if they 
knew, they are more to be trusted, as no injiiry 
could be expected to result from the knowledge of 
a mere date* Now, the inference to' be drawn is, 
that the leader of a horde might not only know how 
long he had retired from Egypt, or Asia Minor, 
and travelled about in Europe, as the time had 
been short; but it may also be supposed, that he 
said what he knew. In the mean time, we will 
compare this cited term, of five years, with other 
circumstances, and see whether they make for or 
against our argument. The first enquiry would be, 
Whether there are any earlier authentic accounts 
of their appearance in Europe, than 1417? But wt 
do not find such auy-where*. The second 'question 

♦ Wilhelm Dilicky in his Hesziscien Chronik, Seit 229- beyu 
Jahr 1414, certainly does say that they arrived during the same 
year in the Hessian territories ; and Fabricius, in ArmaUbb. Misn, 
lays they were driven frotn Meissen in 14\6. Bot Calvbias con* 



II* 

to be decided is;, Whether, if they wer6' ifc><< s»M* 
töv/ards the Black Sea before 1417^, thej^ coulH^itf 
©rife yeai-'s tirtie have reached the North Sea? TKisf 
doubt requires little consideration. A' 3*af i#^* 
quite sufficieiit for people like the Gipsfeysj wiie' 
ileVel- tai-'ried long in a place, to have üiigtati^ 
even fur beyond where they' were found. Agäm^ 
if they Were not in Moldavia and Wallachia earlier 
that! the year 14 iV, and yet appeared durihg( tfetf 
sahle year in the neighbourhood of the ^orth Söa; 
what great ditference' would it make if they daiM 
fVoni a province next beyond Moldavia or Waikcfhi^ 
travelling a few miles ftirther to arrive ät the satAt 
placed It is therefore very credible that 14rl7 wasi 
ihe period of their arrival. * 

Altbough, immediately after their comiiig into 
Germany, they spread so rapidly, that in 1418 
their liam^fe WCre recorded in the annual public 
datioiiis of älttiöÄ evCry part of the country, yet 
particular j^lacCS seem to have been favoured by 
fiierö. Thus, in Bavaria they were not lioticed till 
1453 ; and they must have very quickly withdraw^ 

tradicts Fabricius, and has corrected his date, putting MIS- lor 
14l6. And with regard to Dilich, there must either have been 
1^ mistake in the manuscript from which he composed, of he mdsft 
hWe i^a'd ^Vrötig'; there being no mention' made of (G^i^^sr in 
any of the public prints tili three years afterwards,, via^ 1417, 
It is absurd* to suppose they should i:emain invisible to eveiy other 
]^eirt(bn bblK- if)- and out of Germany, at the same time they an« 
Jenrech td* fM!' eclitx>r o^Ditich's ioteHig^Qce. 



diäifisövri ffoih iihe^^^ ss sixy^ars aftenrard» 

it^ \9^ remarked} aS' somewhat new arid ektraor* 
dfiiaiy, thatT in- this year (1439) the Gipseys, si 
p^k of scbütidrels, • a- vagtent gaiig^ were come into» 
tfeiart ööüntiy, with- their king, whose name waar 

fedi: 

TKey did' nbtf travel together, but in^ dif!e^ent^ 
fipiräesf, each' havings its leadei^, somctimbs callifd 
Ölfiitit'; at othei* times th^f leaders were digfaificd? 
Witii thd titles of dbkcs'or fcirigSi; of Lesser Egypt^*^ 
6tte Körd6 which arrived at Augsburgh in 14l9jj 
dtlipügh it- consisted of only sev^enty men^ had 
S^eh two' of these dukes, beside some counts, with 
thfeiii. But what sbrt of creatures these great men- 
aihoiig the Gipseys wei-e, has been explained ia 
ahbther plate. (Vidfe p. 7Ö, Sg seq.) 

If Stumpf be right, the number of these people 
ih'üist have been veiy considerable. Those alone 
who öamcinto Switzerland in 1718; wofnen and 
diilidrtn included; Were estimated at 14000. But 
iferig htfi oi^ his authority, seems to have gi-eatly 
ifiisfcötmted'. It is true; that he like wse remarks,' 
ijffey diif liotf keep all tbgcither, but went about in 
rftfpardtc'iiärtfie!^; notwithstanding this, hisi account* 
ii* iflüöH t& be doubted. By what is to be found 
cöfteertiiiig pairficulaf HoAles, thiefe' were none 
^i6li* exceeded olie or at? most two^ hundred; 
Hiat which \^nt to Augsburgh in 141^ consisted 
of but seventy men : therefore if ^^ had beeä 



116 - 

»o numerous as Stumpf asserts, there must have been 
at least a hundred such hordes dispersed through 
Switzerland. It was at this time (1418) that Gip- 
8ey^ were first seen at Zurich; they were a swarm, 
whose leader's name was Michael. Four years had 
elapsed before they were known at Basil — -part of 
the very horde of this Michael. Would not some 
other tribe have got to Basil before these, if they 
had been so numerous ? Thomasius adopts ' this 
number of 14000 without suspicion, and under- 
sta^ds it to comprehend the whole multitude all 
over Germany : but then he does not appear to 
have quoted Stumpfs testimony in the sense it was 
meant. Many hordes of them must certainly have 
arrived, as they spread every- where so prodigiously; 
but to persist in any nearer investigation of their 
numbers, would be only useless trouble. 

Their possessions were, as at present, small, and 
their whole arrangement singular; besides which, 
according to the Eastern custom, they hung rag- 
ged clothes about them, instead of other garments. 
Their' leadois only were exceptions. Several had 
horses, asses, or mules, with them, on which they 
loaded their tents, and effects, with the whoje 
family into the bargain. They had also dogsi in 
their train, with which Kranz asserts they uised 
illegally to destroy game : but probably the dogs 
were kept not so much for that purpose, as to tak^ 
fowls and geci^e; 



117 



CHAPTER II. 

% 

On the Sanctity^ Passports, and Diff'erence, of the 
former from the latter Gipseys. 

At the first arrival of the Gipseys in Europe, it 
was generally believed that they were Egyptians 
and pilgrims, constrained* to wander on account of' 
religion. This mistake originated from their own 
relation; but when required to give a more circum- 
stantial detail of the reasons for their pilgrimage, 
they varied very much from each other. Some of 
them declared that they were compelled' to make 
this emigration as an atonement for their forefathers 
having, for some time, apostatised* from the Chris- 
tiah faith : others atsserted that the king of Hun- 
gary had seized their country, and imposed on 
them ' this penance of wandering. A third party 
repretscnted that God had signified to them the 
. necessity of this pilgrimage, by an universal sterility 
' in their country. They supposed this punishment 
to have been inflicted on account of sin committed 
by their ancestors, in refusing to receive the infant 
"Jesus, when carried by his Mother and Joseplx to 
Egypt,' as an asylum from the persecution of 
'Herod. The term of their pilgrimage was to l;^ 
seven years. 
No evidence is necessary to determine that these 



118 

were mere fables; and it is astonishing that men 
should be found to adduce long-winded pioofs of 
the origin of these people, grounded on no better 
authority than such idle tales. We have not now 
any positive grpunds r^m^ning, to shew how these 
legends were invented, or what gave rise to them ; 
^but the real truth seems .to be merely, t^at,}ip^ 
«being asked whence they came, thQ^ :^)3$9^e|[^ 
'from Egypt; and there is no reason ^^xt^li^grJ^ 
'denytheirihaving comefrqm :tlvit CQpptry. ;JNk^ 
priests, ^ monks, or perhaps otb^ /P^plc, rH^Jg^ 
tWonder why they should quit /a placeitOi)vh}Gh,^ 
-holy family ihad ifled for refuge, unless «tl^^^fqtic- 
«iathers had been guilty of some ti;^9^^9i^lPii^ 
«that'OCcasion ; but,;beihis.iasitms^, ;^lt}^t^gjkij^ 
-be said, with ^regard to the arigjinof their lQgf9.4% 
would be . only mere <x>njectuFe. \j^ |t tberffose 
-suffice to say, ?they chose tO}be c(Wjsi<Jese|d eye^- 
^here as pilgrims ; and^this prpfe^sipn .ffliet ^^ 
<rthe -moi« -ready 'belief, .as it 4 coy^fictl with ^tl^ 
infatuation of 'the« times. 

The-oredulity . wth ^wliich) people , «h^ijis))^^ -^ 
•idea- that «the* Gipseys o^er« rQ^lpilgd^.Sja|i4;:|i9^ 
'^persons was attendejd i with the .cpAsequen^, ^t^t 
-they -were not only tolerated, bttt, Jfttl^e.injS^nn^- 
4ion on this head may ibe relied op, they rev?^- 
'«^here^Feceived a^is^nce, with >Qxp|>fiss s9JBeH;^gi«* 
ducts. These safe-conducts are m^ntionjid «jjp 
:feveral oW writings. ^ümt«r 4ecba!p$, ^not 



119' 

ttpfiely, ia r general terms, that .they carried about 

fvfith .tb$pi , passports aud seals from the Emperor 

Sigismiind ^^(^ other priqces, by means of whjoh 

•t})^ Had free .ps^age through different cQuntri^ 

jjmd cities, but that he had himself seen an attested 

•<ffpy pf such a, letter, in the possession of some 

'&ip$^s :^t^ Eberback Besides Kranz, Stumpf, 

4^1 ."Quler, X^uren tins Palmirenus also agrees in 

-i\m .«t^teij^ent; but .the latter writer is guilty of 

^adnist^ake, i|i< confoundingthe Emperor Sigjismuufi 

•^th ;Sigisinund king of Poland. The Gjpse^ys 

.^t rJtplpgna, likewise, shewed an instrument froip 

:3%isnpnd ; . but he appears to have granted this tp 

,tlMcp, Aot as .emperor, and in Germany, but in 

(Qujqgary, apd i^s kipg of Hungary. A pass qf 

.anqtb^ king of Hungary, Uladislaus 11. which 

.thc-Qipseys obtained chiefly on account of tbei» 

i8iippose4 rJapcUty.. a»d pilgrimage, might be 

.€^te4- {They were not destitute in Transyly^nisi, 

:if it be tni^, as asserted, that they received this 

.sort pf letters of protection from the princes of tlie 

fhßWß of Bathory. Wehncr says, that the Gipjscgcs 

(IAfEi;^nQe likewise quoted ancient privileges, .grant- 

^«drto tiiem by the former kings of that country. 

vpfi|$ius, Wurstisen, and Guler, mention papal 

^)>erfnissip;i$^ which Qiese people ^acquired, fqr 

. ^]9^4eri|j!g, unmolested, through all Chris tis^i 

t2iQ0vutnQ$, §0 .long ^s the tipe of their pilgriiRfi^c 



120 

This is the iaformation we find, dispersed herjk 
and there, concernirig the privileges and passes of 
the Gipseys. Tp how much, or how little, arc 
we to give credit? Thomasius believes every thing 
as it stands. Ahasuerus Fritsch, on the contrary, 
. declares all to be lies, and the Gipseys' own in- 
vention. Appearances are certainly equivocal, as 
none of these instruments are even verbally hand- 
ed down to us, so that they can be properly 
proved ; except that of Uladislaus II. which doe» 
not belong to this question. Moreover, it has 
been frequently experienced, that the- Gipseys, 
using the pretence of such safe-conducts, have 
committed all manner of excesses, and when , 
desired to pr.oduce them, had either nothing to 
shew, or such kind of papers as did not at all re- 
semble what are usually given from a public office. 
It 'cannot be denied that they have practised 
deceit, but it is impossible to assert, with certainty, 
that the whole was fallacv. If the contents of 
tliat passport to be found in Muratori is con- 
ceived in such terms as to allow the horde which 
possessed it to wander about seven years, to rob 
and steal every-where, without any person being 
permitted to bring them to justice, such a letter 
seems to carry fklshood on the very face of it^ 
as no sensible prince could ever grant such a one. 
But what shall we sav, if it be found that these 
words do not so much convev the sense of the 



isl 

1 

kistroment, a» a crafty explanation of the author^ 
qn recollecting the many irregularities practised by 
the Gipseys, v^ho availed themselves of this free« 
dorn to travel about every-where unmolested. Fuf« 
ther» with respect to the passport which Münster 
perused at Eberbach, although every person 
must look upon the reasons given by the Gipseys 
for their emigration as fictions, yet we cannot 
entirely reject it How could it benefit them» 
being old, and having lost its validity many years 
ago? Why did not the horde to which it belonged 
carry with them son>j^ writing that might aftbrd 
them present protections If they had been guilty 
of any knavery about this letter, why was it just 
€£ that kind as could only serve, incontrovertiblyi 
to prove they were cheats? These documents 
would certainly not have been found among themi 
had they not been transmitted, from their parents 
and ancestors, as things of value. Supposing 
this matter to have been invented by themselves^ 
it is difficult to conceive why they should confine 
their privileges to seven years, and not rather 
leave them unlimited. But there are other proofs 
of the authenticity of such letters. First, they 
were looked upon as pilgrims; and it was quite 
conformable to the custom of those superstitious 
times to grant to pilgrims, äs holy people, all sorts of 
passes, and safe-conducts. Secondly, we must believe 
that this did happen with the Qipseys, when we 



read with what chagrin Aventin nnentioiis their 
thefts and excesses, concluding thus : ** Robbing 
" and stealing are prohibited to othfers, .under pam 
* of hanging or beheading, but these people have 
^ " Ucence for tliem.*' When, thirdly, in the deeree 
of the diet at Augsburgh anno 1500, aÜTaaläsof 
people in the empire are strictly enjoined, in future, 
not to permit the people called Gipseys U> t^vel 
through their countries and distrists, nor to giant 
them any further * protection and con voy^ it 
certainly implies that people iiad formerly gnujted 
'them such protection and- convoy. Whopvcr 
has still any doubts remäinhigi msty read, foui^hlya 
in a decree of the empire of fifty years later ^te, 
a regular complaint preferred on account off the 
passports granted by various princes to the Gipq^s, 
and which are, by that diet, declared to be-jaull 
and void. All these circumstances together -will 
not, it may be presumed, allow the shadow of 
a doubt to remain, that such letters of cony of 
have been really granted to the Gipseys*. 



* But we have more than circumstantial proof of the exiitcnee 
of these safe-conducts, as besides a later, but here vtwy pertinent» 
order of the former groat Hungarian count Thurso» given ja tk» 
year l6lff, remarkable for its serious and humane contents, an 
older one, granted in the earliest age of the Gipseys, h still 
extant. It is written on paper, and Was* brought by those who 
were at Regenspurgh in 1423. Andreas Presbyter copied it intQ 
his lix-yean Journal, which was in the ppisessioa of Ocfelius, 



•A 



«- ?■'. 



.133 

^hc öipseys' golden age lasted a coi^siderable 
Ikne ; tut when about half a century had elasped, 
and people began to look at them with a watchful 
iCye, the old prejudices gave way. They endea- 
voured to prolong the term, by asserting, that their 
;^turn home was prevented by soldiers stationed 
to intercept them, and by wishing to hav« it 
lielieved that new parties of pilgrims were to leave 
their country every year, otherwise their land 
would be rendered totally barren. All thisi was 
«f no avail ; people saw too clearly, that, instead 
X)f holy pilgrims, they were the mere refuse of 
humanity : upon which followed the sentences of 
t^nishment, \ve have before mentioned. 

Before we proceed to other matters, it will be 
•proper to say a few words respecting an assertion 
in some writings, that the latter Gipseys differ 
very widely from tlipse who went about dur- 
ing the first seven years, both with respect 
,to their conduct and descent. Stumpf, for 
instance, and others after him, relate, that these 
fir^t Gipseys were very orderly and decent, did 
po harm to any one, but paid ready money for 
vhat they consumed ; for which purpose they 
xeceived fresh remittances constantly : and at 
the expiration of seven yeai's they returned home» 
.Afterwards an idle desperate crew united, who, 
when the Gipseys were withdrawn, took their 
pUc$ ; wdy by bJLackeoing their faceS; at the sam^ 



144 

time using the like outlandish garments» endea- 
voured to persuade the world that they were tbe 
indentical Egyptians» 

This is all related with so much appearance of 
veracity, that, at the first view, no doubt would 
seem to remain of its truth ; wherefore Thomasiur 
readily adopted the whole, and founded his system 
about the Gipseys upon it : but upon closer ex- 
amination, we shall find thait tbe statement u^ 
totally void of foundation« 

This proceeding, we acknowledge, is recorded 
in four different annual publications ; but all the 
four amount to only a single testimony, which 
rests entirely upon Stumpf, from whom the other 
three have drawn their assertions. Let it remain« 
as Tliomasius will have it, an old manuscript account 
or chronicle ; it is still evident that the favourable 
description of the ancient Gipseys originates from 
the same prejudice as first produced their passports. 
And even these passports may have contributed 
to recommend the first Gipseys. They have had 
so much effect on Thomasius, that all the good 
he has given the above-mentioned primitive Gip- 
seys credit for, has been principally owing to 
them. 

When Stumpf, or rather his authority, mentions, 
with other circumstances, that the earlier Gipseys 
received remittances from time to time out of their 
own countryi it was a necessaty addition, to sup- 



las 

port tht editor s opinion ; as the reader, who was 
to believe that these people did not steal, but paid 
money for every thing they wanted, would have 
been sceptical had he not been informed before 
hand where the money came from, in order to 
provide for their necessities, in an honest way, 
during the term of seven years. 

With regard to the latter Gipseys, they were 
certainly lineal descendants from the former ; who 
were undoubtedly, equally with these, thieves, 
cheats, and vagrants. The uprightness and honesty 
falsely allowed to the Gipseys, in the manuscript 
chronicle which Stumpf copied, might, even before 
Stumpfs time, have induced the continuator of 
this chronicle to believe, on finding his cotem- 
porary Gipseys lived very differently from what 
had been represented of their predecessors, that 
the former were not the true Egyptians : he ac- 
cordingly wrote down his surmise, not by way of i^^^V 
conjecture, but as positive truth, and Stumpf, in 
his Annual Register, afterwards quoted it as such. 
Whoever does not allow this, but considers the 
latter Gipseys in the light that Stumpf represents 
them, must be ready to answer, when called upon 
to solve, the following doubt : — How was it possi'' 
ble that a collection of rascals assembled in Europe 
supposing that with respect to complexion an4 
clothing they should be able to transform them* 
«elves into real Gipseys, could at once acquir«^ 



^!P>^ ? 



'«■' 



foreign countenances, speak ä foreign langq^j^ 
and, both in constitution and turn of mind, become 
perfectly oriental; and at the same tmie contract 
a taste and desire for carrion, which remain with 
theiL to this day ? It cannot be denied but that 
$ome depraved people have associated themselvCJ? 
%vith the Gipseys: but particular instances arcf 
not proots of general maxims. 



isr 



- V : .:.• . «9APTEE III. 

f. Presumed Origin of the Gipseys, 

Tt would be equally useless, prolix, and revolting^ 
to reconsider the multitude of conjectures which 
the questions — " What race of people are the Gip- 
seys r and — " Where are we to look for their true 
mother country?** have occasioned. The greatest 
part of them are of such a nature, that they need 
only, be heard, to be totally rejected. We shaU 
nevertheless produce some examples, as an excuse 
for passing over the rest in silence. 

Various conjectures have been formed, and coin- 
cidences have been searched for, to obtain a solu- 
tion of these queries. Some persons adverted to 
this or that name only of th^ Gipseys, without 
attending to other circumstances. Because they 
w^ere likewise called Gipseys (Cingani)j they must 
immediately derive their origin from the Greeiati 
heretics, called Athingans : then again they must 
Jbave wandered from the African province formerly 
rCalle^ Zeugitana *. Another time they are sup- 
posecl to be the fugitives driven from the city. 
Singara, in Mesopotamia, hy Julian the Apostate: 
•thers again transplanted them to Mount Caucasus» 

* The eastern division of tbe present kingdoia of Tunif« 



ISS 

f ■ _ 

and made them Zochori ; or to the Palus Msotri^ 
making them descendants from the Ziches *• Some 
people imagined that instead of Zigeuner, they 
should be called Zigarener, which they thought a 
corruption of Saracener, and they must certainly 
be Saracens. Another writer (to return to Africa) 
conducts them from the Mauritanian province 
Tingitane, and supposes them to be the Canaanitesi 
who, . being driven out by Joshua, settled here. 
Still another brings them from Mauritania, and, to 
^rroborate his opinion by the name, calls them 
descendants of Chus; as he thinks nothing can 
have a greater affinity in sound, than Zigeuner and 
Chusener. Herbelot judges the coast of Zengebar 
to be their mother amntry, Bellonius, on the 
contrary, looks for them in Bulgaria and Wallachi^ 
where their ancestors are said to have lived, under 
the name Sigynner. Cordova stumbled on Zigere, 
formerly a city of Thrace, which he assigns as their 
native soil. Some people fancied they had heard 
that the Gipseys called themselves More, and often 
used the name amori among one apother (not 
ämori^ but Discha wore— Get out, fellow!} and 
now they are Aniorites ! 
Anotber party, besides this or that appelktion 



* Ziehen, Zigier, or Zincher, among th^ ancients, called in the 
earlit St times Achaans, dwelt in the country novi inhabited by 
U^e Circassians, 



IS« 

fbr the Gipaejrs, considered their unsettled waj of 
life, or selected some particular circumstance from 
their manners, by which they decided concerning 
their origin» Wherefore they were 8ome,timei 
torlaques, faquirs, or kalendars*; sometimes the 
remains of Attila's Huns ; at other times the Avar^ 
who were vanquished by Charles the Great : thea 
again Petschenegers, who played their last stake in 
the twelfth century ; or perhaps a mixture of all 
kinds of rascally people gathered together, having 
collectively no certain country, as their name 
Zigeuner indicates, signifying, ^ to wander up and 
down;* — for which reason, it is said, our German 
ancestors denominated every strolling vagrant 
Zichegan. By several wrijters they have been 
t. 

* The torlaques are Mahometan monks, who, under the pre* 
lence of holiness, are guilty of the most flagrant excesses« B^|aael 
the Second banished them from the Turkish empire in 1494* Thm 
kalendarsy ii^ho are likewise monks, wander about in Heathen, aa 
the Gipseys do in Christian, coantries. Faquiri are religious 
fenaticsy and rove about in Mahometan and Heathen countries, 
like the most atrocious robbers and villains. Anquetil says, the 
Faquirs in India go pilgrimages to Jagrenat, to the amount of 
several thousands. On their return from Jagrenat they plunder 
such villages and cities as lie in their way. They form consi« 
derable bodies about a mile from Jagrenat, where they choose 
themselves a leader, to whom they pay all the honours due to a 
generaK With regard to strolling and thieving, the Faquin and 
Gipseys agree exactly. But this provcy aothii^^ concerning the 
jpxtT^fyak of th^ latter* 



149 

ftotigfat inhabitant» of the Alps tnd Fyren^ei^ 
tthers suppose them to be Cain s descendantsy whcv 
en account of the curse denounced, against their 
JCock, have been compelled to lead a wandering 
^grant life. Because they pretend to tell fortune^ 
«DDie have supposed them to be Chaldeans, or s(nb€ 
S[yrian religious sect. Brodaeus formed his ja<Ip 
ftent from their clothes, in which he thought \m 
discovered a resemblance to the Roman toga; an4 
Ibence he iniagined they were natives of Wallacbii^ 
4[6scendants from the colony sent by Trajan into 
l)acia to keep this newly-conquered country steady 
ib M allegiance. And, according to his assertioi\ 
jeople in Germany do really call them JVahttn (he 
irrites fValachtnX that is to say Italians. 

All these opinions are merely conjecture; it- 
Would tlufrefore be useless to proceed with the list 
•f them : but it may be proper to cite a few which 
A^em to have a greater appearance of probability. 
Let us begin with Wagenseil. He considers the 
Gipseys to be German Jews; who, about the 
jniddle of the fourteenth century, to escape the 
dreadful persecution which raged against them aU 
IKer Europe, especially in Germany, secreted tbem^ 
selves in forests *, deserts, and subterraneous ca- 

• The cause of this persecution was a dreadful plague whicH^ 
'in thcy(arl34S, raged all over Europe. This calami fy niii 
attributed to the Jews, \vho were accused of haTiiig poisoned thh 
welb and. water-springs, in order to exterminate tke'ChrStilkOlL 



K'* ^ I 



veftii. tn theste hiding-places' ihty rttttain^Ä iödVe 
half a century,* riot making thiir aj5peärancc ^agaiÄf 
tili the period of thie Hussites; a» the Kvissi^i 
heresy then engrossed the public atttfntitrf*, itHh 
regard to the Jews? all was safe. Bnt not d'aring' ^ 
to' declare themselves, they fell on the device of • 
iaVing, that their respect for the Mosaic hw woirM' 
not ipermit theih to become Christians, at the satire! ? 
time styling themselves, in general terms, Egyptian 
pilgrims. Those who did not yet know what th€f 
were, nor whence they came, from their wandelt 
itig about (einher ziehen) called them Gipsey* 
{Zigeuner). To establish this supposition reipect^ 

Jng the origin of the Gipseys, he i*eferii to nheit 

• ■ • ■ . 

Never did any description of people öj^erience greater oppref^ 

sion and misery than what were suffered by the Jews ofthat time. 

A}1 the gaols and prisons were crowded with them; they were put 

to the rack in every judicial court. The day was scarcely ToBj 

eÄoügh for the execution of the poor condemned wretche*'; wbt 

iRfere the nights ever dark, by reason of tht3 eodtinnal fire^ V^kid^ 

vrere kept burning every-where, to- consurare ihem. at the «tafc«. 

Vast numbers, who had escaped the rigour of the tribunals, fell a 

sacrifice to popular fury. They were suffocated in bogs, slaugn« 

iered like flies, and destroyed by other summary means."' Theri 

tiftts ho distinction made of age or Sex : the same unrdetitrnj «fate 

l^tiT^ed Men and dornen, ehilchrn and grey-headed, mthotrf <l^ 

eieption^ To^l tiii^tr as added the plagUe, which attacked tbe 

Jews äs wejl as* the Christiansw Under such circumstances, lyif 

BO wonder if sueK as could escape from a persecution so dread» 

fill, and. unmerited, really did secrete themselves in the most r^ 

fe«d,corti^n|, . -^ 



l4ä 

language, which he says is a mixture of Germtn 
and Hebrew^, quoting, in proof of his assertion^ 
»ear fifty words, which are evidently.Hebrew. Hie 
then asks, Whence sliould the Gipseys have gotten 
so many Hebrew words into their language, if they 
were not Jews ; at a time too when Hebrew was 

unknown to all other nations? ^This opinion 

bears infinitely more the appearance of truth, than 
any one of those befor^ cited. It must also have 
been deemed incontrovertible by the learned author^ 
as he mentions it, in the introduction to his treatise, 
with great confidence, and as much self-congratu- 
lation as if he had discovered the philosoplierV 
stone. Notwithstanding all this, the confutation 
IS so short and easy, that very few words are suf- 
ficient to overturn the whole system ; which rests 
entirely on the language : — the words quoted arc 
taken from a gibberish vocabulary ; but gibberish 

is not the Gipsey language What relates to the 

Jewish persecution is very just; but all the rest arc 
mere, and frequently inconsistent, conjectures, 
founded on it by the learned writer, 

A later opinion is, that the Gipseys are a horde 
•f Tartars, which separated from the multitude 
ttnder Timur, when he invaded western Asia, about 
the year 1401. The supposed proofs are: — Firsts 
t)ecause the Mongols (Mongols and Tartars are 
here reckoned one and the same people) are just as 
nomadic as the Gipseys. Secondly, because thest 



us 

have sometimes dedared themselves to be Tartarti 
Thirdly, because the Glpsey king mentioned by 
Aventin, whbse name' was Zundel or Zindelo, m 
Mongol clian, was a descendent from the great 
Zingis: as Zindelo is a very easy change from 
Zingis. Fourthly, because, among tlic. several 
states into which the Mongol empire was divided 
after the death of Zingis, one was called Dsongar, 
and the members of it Dsongari, which agrees per- 
fectly with Zingari, Fifthly, because the Tartar 
and Gipsey languages have a great affinity to each 
other ; for during a late war between Russia and 
the Porte, a commander of Crim Tartars, by name 
Devlet Gueray, signalised himself very much ; and 
this Devlet is perhaps derived from Devia, the 
Gipsey appellation for the Deity, and may be a 
name under which the Tartars reverence any thing 
respectable. Sixthly, and lastly, because the time 
of Timur s expedition agrees very well with the 

first appearance of the Gipseys. ^This is an 

opinion founded on six points, and one might add, 
in further confirmation of it, that this hypothesis 
will reasonably determine how the Gipseys, such 
poor wretches in general, came to be so well stored 
with gold and silver at their first arrival rn Europe, 
as Stumpf and others assert If they were part of 
Timur's followers, it was very likely to be plunder 
taken from the people they had conquered. 
Of ail these grounds, that adduced from th« 



.1 • 



« .* 



. I 



f ( 



^wnirable (Cnncurre uc^ of chronolo^ca) evtnta lia^ 
♦Iäc mo&t weight, but proves jicitUqr .more.PQjc ;les« 
than the bare possibility of tli^ Xhif^g. . Witkrc- 
jipect to the ; first point, it is not so clearly esta- 
J^lished. The Tartars are herdsmen, and the. quality 
of the pasture for their cattle implies a fixed x;c&id* 
ßnce. Gipseys, on the contrary, arc ignoranjt u 
jto teiiding cattle, nor liave they the smallestidea 
.about breeding them- Further^ whe^ther they arp 
Tartars, because they represent ,themselve3^g,s sucl^ 
pr.have been declared such by Qther. people ; .whe- 
Ithcr Zindelo is a Moögol chan^ because . his jxanoc 
is easily derived from^^ingisj whether» J;heteJ> 
guage of the Tartars bear^ a near affinity; to that of 
;the Gipseys, because a native of Tartary wajS foun4 
whose name, Devlet, is perhaps j^eriv^d from th? 
Cipsey word Devla, and a? that word among;. the 
Gipseys signifies God, it may possibly among the 
Tartars signify something like ifei-^-all this niustb^ 
ißft to the readers discretion. ^ such assertionjj 
^readrtiitted for proofs, then the Gipseys must be 
Bohemians, because they are called so in France. 
Thus Chiflet must have been of Gipsey or TartajT 
descent, because his name may possibly )be dei;ive4 
from Devla or Devlet* Tlie Franks too, arc pro- 
bat^ly derived from the Trojans, because Phara- 
mond, their king's name, may be formed from 
Priamus» Dsongari and Zingari compared witb 
each otiier do coiuad^ Ks^ciept tha( th» Utter 



f$oa\y iifae Latin termination givfin h^iiie iMtfMfid 
But, besides all this, if the Gip^eys siUAt rbe T^tBff 
It allevents, yfhefe aie the Tartars' broaci .fax*ies?rr< 
Hf hepc is their courage P-^^Where are <\\fi izfialous 
religious principles with which the Ilartar^ honour 
the Deity, and, upon occasiun, figi^t for billl^^ 
Einaily/ with regard to language, thi^ contradiot^ 
rather than supports the opinion we are discu^füiig; 
The language of the TartaiB i« Turkii^; that -of 
the Gipsey s is quite different, as will be ^»^««tftsr 
proved. 

As these and the like argumentfs oiather somtgo-' 
rert' the Tartar origin of die Gipsey s, »o £a,n (vm Jfi 
little agree with Mr. Pray, in sijppdsiüg theoi iß 
be [Tartars] of Asia Minor, from ihe countriisi^ ß( 
the ancient Ziehen, whose nanie the 'Xxip/seys sge 
laid to bear ; nor with an older writer» Ekbaffd« 
who icontends that they are Circassians, terrified 
from their habitations by Timur*s Mongolism iMr« 
Pray brings nothing further in support of his ' sur* 
mise, thap die similarity of sound in the ^mmfB 
Zigianer (Ziehen or properly Zygier) and ZigeuMf ; 
together with the circumstance, tliat the latter ap- 
peared among us soon after Timiir's expedition into 
Asia Minor. Ekhard, on the contrary, who in like 
manner unites th^e names Zigeuner and Circassier — ' 
by endeavouring to prove that these, as possessom 
of the countries belonging to the Ziehen, were by 
authors indiiferently styled Circassier, Zygier^ an4 



U6 

Ziehen— -adds moreover» that the Circassian com* 

plexion was a brown yellow, exactly like that of 

the Gipseys ; that they both 8uff|r their haii^ to 

hang loose over the shoulders ; that in their diet 

and clothes they are both equally dirty ; and lastly, 

that among the Circassians, you meet with a^tro- 

logy f and all kinds of witchcraft, precisely the 

fame as among the Gipseys. But this comparison, 

were it even better founded than it is, would only 

prove that you may make what you please of the 

Gipseys. Upon the same ground, they might just 

las well be supposed to be allied to the people of 

Otaheite, or any other uncivilised nation in any 

quarter of the globe. And yet the author draws 

this conclusion from it, that one egg is not more 

like another than the Circassian and the Gipsey ; 

and he may confidently assert, that all who before 

his time have been of a different opinion^ were 

mistaken. 

We ought long ago to have spoken of the re^ 
puted Egyptian descent of the Gipseys; but af 
that has been a very current, and almost universaUj 
teodvedy opinion, it merits a chapter by itself. 



147 



GHAPTER I\\ 

On the Egyptian Descent of the Gipseys. 

The belief that Gipseys are of Egyptian origin^ is 
parallel with theexistance of these people in Europe- 
It arose from the report circulated by the first of 
them who arrived here that they were pilgrim» 
from Egypt; and this statement has not only 
been universally adopted by the common people, 
but has also, here and there, obtained credit among 
men of learning. Had this opinion not been 
received at a time when every thing was taken 
upon trust without examinaticmj had it not been 
propagated every- where by the first Gipseys, and 
obtained the sanction of time in following agesr; it 
would have been impossible for it to have gained 
such general acceptation, or to have maintained 
itself even to the latent times. 

Till the seventeenth century^ the Egvptian 
descent of the Gipseys rested entirely on tradition. 
Thomasiüs was the first who endeavoured to" 
establish this matter on satisfactory evidence. 
Those who, since him, have supported the same 
opinion, are principally the Englishman Salmon; 
and, lately, Signor (irisclini. Before their vouchers 
are produced, it will be proper to mention that 



148 

Thomasius speaks only of the Gipseys who 
travelled about Europe during the first seven years 
after their arrival ; for he thinks that, after seven 
ycjars were elapsed, these, excepting a very few, 
returned home again, and after their retreat the 
present set was produced, as has been already 
described. In this particular, he differs entirely 
from the other two writers, making the latter 
Gipseys a distinct race of people from those who 
first arrived. On the contrary, Salmon, as well as 
Griselini, consider the Gipseys that arc now 
wandering in Europe, and with truth, as lineal 
descendants of the former, consequently bring them 
all from Egypt. 

Thomasius says : " The first Gipseys never 
" would allow themselves to be any people but 
" Egyptians ; asserting always, that the Lesser 
Egypt was their mother country : and they de- 
serve credit, as they were an honourable worthv 
set of people."' One observation will be sufiScient 
in reply: — Among the oldest writers who, prior 
to Stumpf, mention the Gipseys, not one seems to 
be acquainted with their worth. But Thomasius 
himself discovered the weakness of his first araru- 
ment, and therefore hastens to another. "Be 
this as it may,** he proceeds, " they were in the 
earliest times, when doubtless something more 
" certain was extant, always looked upon as 
" Egyptians : so that it docs not become us, who 



it 

it 

cc 






149 

V* live two hundred years later, positively to reject 
" what was at that time generally assented to." 
Our author was not aware that this kind of reason- 
ing proves too much ; for by the same mode of 
arguing, every antiquated error,, every ridiculous 
superstition, may be defended. If this be admitted, 
Satan gets his cloven foot again, of which modern 
unbelief had bereft him. Thus, Christian Thoma-. 
sius acted unjustifiably wheü he laid violent hands 
on 'witches arid sorcerers, and put an end to their 
existence, though credited from the highest anti- 
quitjv Thomasius imagines there were other 
proofs, beside the Gipseys' own assertions, that 
they were Egyptians; this supposition, however, 
not only has nothing to support it, but is openly 
contradicted by Aventin, Kranz, and Münster. It 
is not authenticated because the chronicles uni- 
versally mention it as a saying of the Gipseys, 
whenever they speak of their coming from Egypt 
It is confuted by Aventin, who rejects their 
Egyptian descent ; at the same time he alledges, 
that they wished to be thought from that country. 
In his time, nothing was known concerning them, 
but what came from their own mouths : and those 
who thought them Egyptians, rested their belief 
entirely on the veracity of their informants. This 
is collected with greater certainty from Kranz and 
Münster; for these declare expressly, that every 
thing which could be discovered, by any other 

M 2 



150 

iheans than tKeir own assertiotis, contradicted 
rather than confirmed their Egyptian descents 
Yet Thomasius has more proofs; he cites the re- 
semblance between the Gipseys and the inhabitants 
of the Lesser Egypt, whence they say they came. 
But many people lay this difficulty in his way, that 
the name of L^esser Egypt is not . to be found 
in any system of geography, but is a mere inven- 
tion of the Gipseys. He rests his opinion on that 
of Vulcanius, who looks upon Nubia to be the 
Lesser Egypt, and thinks, for what reason does not 
appear, that the Nubians themselves called their 
country by that name. These are the similarities : 
—Nubians, as well as Gipseys, confess themselves 
Christians; both lead a wandering life, and both 
are of a dark brown complexion : to which some 
resemblances in shape between the Gipseys and 
Egyptians are introduced in general terms. Whe- 
ther there be any affinity in their languag'es he 
leaves undetermined, because, he says, he knows 
nothing about it. That the name of Zigeuner ij 
the same as Egyptian, and the former is derived 
from the latter, he proves in the following ingenious 
manner : *^ The Spaniards — who, instead of Egyp- 
taner, call them Gitanos — ^have cut oiF the first 
syllable- Our forefathers, who exceeded the Span- 
iards in the art of mangling names, have rejected 
two syllables, and^ instead of Egyptianer, first 
called them Cianer, afterwards, in order to fill 



151 

up the chasm between i and a, Cigarier, Further, 
as we, instead of Italianer, say Itahener, we have also 
changed Cig-aner into Cigener ; and at last, as people 
in Upper Germany are very fond of diphthongs, Ci- 
geuner, or Zigeuner, has been produced." Now, 
if any thing can be proved by all this, in the same 
manner the several opinions quoted in the former 
chapter are likewise established. And yet, after 
all, who will say, that, insteail of Egyptier, 
Egyptianer, whence Cianer, Ciganer, and thus 
progressively through all the changes, Zigeuner 
may be produced ? With regard to the denomi* 
nation of Lesser Egypt, ranked under the list of 
Gipsey fables, and brought as evidence to overset 
Thomasius's system, because Egypt never was 
divided into Greater and Smaller, it is nevertheless 
a true geographical name, though certainly not to 
be found in the treatises on geography : it how^ 
ever appears in the title of a Turkish emperor. 
A declaration of war, made by Achmet IV. against 
John Casimir, king of Poland, in 1652, begins 
with the following words: " I sultan, a king and 
" son of the Turkish emperor, a soldier of the God 
" of the Greeks and Babylonians — r — king of the 
" Greater and Lesser Egypt.'' The Gipseys have 
.therefore, in this instance, been falsely accused 
of a fiction : but whether by this Lesser Egypt, 
Lower Egypt be understood, cannot be deters 
jnined. 



u 
a 



152 

Salmon believes the Gipseys to be Mamelukes, 
who were obliged to quit Egypt in 1517, when 
the Turkish emperor conquered this country, and 
thereby put an end to the Circassian government 
They are reputed to have acquired the name of 
Zigeuner, or in the Turkish language Zinganies, 
from a Captain Zinganeus,. who was veiy active 
in opposing the Turks. How all this is proved, 
will best appear from his own words: " Thiey 
** had no occasion for any testimony to shew they 
were of Egyptian descent. The blackness of 
their skin clearly indicated from' what part they 
• ^ came. What confirms me, in my belief of this 
** intelligence, concerning the origin of the Gipseys, 
*Ms an act of Parliament, passed in the twenty- /> 
" seventh year of the reign of Henry VIII. — that 
is, fourteen years after the victory obtained by 
Sclim emperor of the Turks over Egypt — oq 
" which arc the following words : Whereas certtun - 
" outlandish people, who do not profess any craft 
** or tradey whereby to maintain^ themselves ; but 
" go about, in great numbers, from place to place, 
^^ using insidious underhand means to impose on 
" his Majesty's subjects, making them believe that 
" they understand the art vf foretelling to men 
" and women, their good or ill fortune, by looking 
" in their hands, whereby they frequently defraud 
^^. people. of their, money ; likewise are guilty of thefts 
^^ and highway robberies: it is hereby orderedy that 






153 

^* the said vagrantSy commonly called Egyptiansy hi 
** case- they remain one month in the kingdom^ shall. 
*^ be proceeded against as thieves and rascals^ and 
^' on the importation of any such Egyptian, he ('the 
" impo7^ter) shall forfeit 40 /. . . . for every tres^ 
^^pass^ He then quotes another act, passed dur- 
ing the reign of Queen Elizabeth, wherein the 
Gipseys are also called Egyptians. 

From the blackness of their skins, tlierefdre, 
with the official use of the name Egyptian, Salmon 
first draws the inference that they were really 
Egyptians : then, because the first decree published 
against the Gipseys in England was fourteen years 
after Selim's conquest of Egypt,- that they werft 
IVIamelukes. There is not any connection to be 
discovered in either conclusion. The Parliament 
used in the act the word Egyptian, because it wa^ 
universally current in England. Whether the Qip^ 
seys were Egyptians or not, was a question of 
learning, totally irrelevant with the intentioÄ of 
the order; nor could it be determined by any 
juridical decree. 

There is still less reason for supposing them 
Mamelukes who had travelled from Egypt on ita 
being taken by Selim in 1517, and tracing their 
name from one of their leaders : as both they and 
thieir name were known in Europe at least a hun- 
dred years preceding the fall of Gawry ; oi: ]>£for(; 



154 

Tumanbai, the latest hope of the Mamelukes, was 
. hanged*. 

Griselini advances numerous reasons in support 
of his opinion, and would certainly go a great way 
towards determining the Egyptian origin of the 
Gipseys, if, as in most investigations, more did not 
depend upon the quality than the number of the 
proofs. Yet he does not suppose them to be ge- 
nuine Egyptians ; and for this reason, because the 
greatest number of those resemblances which he 
has sought becween Egyptians and Gipseys, btr 

* 

* Sultan Selim had drawn out bis troops against Persia, with 
the determination, if not to conquer the country entirely, at least 
to do them all the mischief he cuuld ; for which reason • his 
tremendous army was already, in J 517» encamped near Aleppo. 
Gawri, the Circassian Sultan in Egypt, when he heard of this 
enterprise, being fearful that after Selim had accomplished 
his intentions respecting Persia, he might attack him, sent am- 
bassadors, to ofifer his assistance against the Persians. ' Selim 
accepted it, and Gawri immediately collected his forces. As the 
two armies lay near each other, it so happened that some Cir* 
cassians attacked, and plundered, some loaded camels^ which 
were going to Selim's camp. Selim, who looked upon this as 
an afiiront, instantly resolved to leave the Persians quiet for the 
present, and to draw his sword against his ally. This he accord- 
ingly did, and Gdwri, being betrayed by two of his generals, 
ivas de^ated^ and fell in the action. Those who escaped from the 
battle fled to Kahire, whore they related what had passed ; and 
a general assembly being convened, they immediatly proceeded 
to the election of a new king, Tumanbey. Ht» marched to attacL 
Selim once more, was defeated, and having experienced various 



155 

• 

tended to prove the latter descended from the 
former, are not applicable to the question. Be^ 
sides, he finds himselt* under the necessity of look- 
ing for foreign helps; and what he cannot make 
coincide with the Egyptians, he meets with among 
the Ethiopians and Troglodytes : these he intro* 
duces pronuscuously, kneads the whole together, 
and determines the Gipseys to be a mixture of 
Ethiopians, Egyptians, and Troglodytes. This 
very circumstance, even before his reasons are con- 



reverses of fortune, at last fell into his hands. Selim was so 

charmed with his understanding, that he not only granted him 

his fi-eedom, but intended to appoint him viceroy over Egypt. 

However, belbre this event took place, people began to talk freely 

concerning their hopes, that when Selim should have withdrawn, 

Tumanbey, with the remaining Circassians and Arabian», might 

be able to drive his troops out of Egypt, and ri'instatc the 

Circassians in their former clominion. These reports came to 

Selim's knowledge ; yet his confidence was so great, that be at 

first did not entertain any suspicion of Tumanbey. But at 

length, when they continued, and even increased, he ordered tho 

unhappy man to be arrested, and hanged under one of the gatct 

of Kahire. On which occasion, like a true barbarian, he made 

use ot the following words : ^' How great my favour was towtrd» 

^ him, I have sufficiently proved ; the effects of hit partitan»' 

'' conversation, let the wretch himself experience." With him 

not only ended the government of the Circas»ian8 in Egypt, after 

it had continued 2S6 years, but, by command of Selim, tbey 

were for several days left Xo the mercy of their conqucron, who 

treated them with the greatest crur-lty. 



ii 



U6 

sidered, renders the matter very suspicious. By 
the same means, it would not be very difficult to 
shew that the Italians are, in part, on account of 
their nastiness, Ostiacks ; in part, because of their 
superstition, and admiration of magnificent edifices, 
Egyptians; and lastly, in part, for their dastardly 
treacherous revenge, Chinese. 

Griselini begins his comparisons with the dispo- 
sition of the Gipseys. He says, " They are in- 
clined to melancholy, and are desperate in the 
first emotions of their anger : — Ammianus Mar- 
" cellinus describes the Egyptians, of his time, in 
" nearly the same terms. 

*^ With regard to religion," he proceeds, " the 
" Gipseys of the Banat always conform to that 
" which prevails in the village, be it the Roman- 
*' catholic or the Illyrian Greek. They have not 
*^ the least comprehension of either ; in which ig- 
" norahce they perfectly resemble the Wallachians 
*^ — except that they observe the strict fasts of the 
" Greek church with more exactness. The Wal- 
** lachians separate from their wives only during 
" the last days of the great fasts : the Gipseys, on 
•* the contrary, avoid their society from the be^ 
" ginning to the end ; also on the Ascension of the 
" Blessed Virgin, in Advent, and especially all vigils. 
*' — Apuleius, and other writers of antiquity, takQ 
'' particular notice of the Egyptian fasts, whose 



157 

'** strictness consisted chiefly in this, ,that the man 
^* held himself obliged to refrain from his consort's 
/^*bed. 

" But, beside these solemn fasts, the Gip&eys of 
" the Banat observe a degree of temperance, and a 
^* choice in their diet, even on those days when all 
" kinds of food are permitted. They abstain ftorn 
^' frogs and tortoises ; wherein they accord with 
" the Waliächians, Raizes, and other Christians of 
" the Greek church. Moreover, they refrain from 
" some kinds of river fish, viz. the red-scaled 
" bream, perch, and lampreys ; of which it is 
"known that, among the Egyptians, the race of 
" Likopolis and Tagaroriopolis refused to taste. 
" The Gipseys are adverse to all feathered game, 
" and particularly to birds of prey. The stork, 
'* when he deigns to build on their wretched huts, 
" is highly esteemed by them : — ^^one of these birds, 
" like its relation ibis, was an object of worship, 
^* with other symbolical Egyptian deities. 

" Of four-footed animals, the Gipseys are niöst 
** fond of swine's flesh, particularly salted. — ^The 
** Egyptians likewise consumed a great number of 
*^ these creatures, though they looked upon their 
^* herds and keepers to be uncleart. 

" The Gipseys haiig up large onions in their 
** dwellings, but do not eat theih. — Besides that 
^* the Egyptianis honoured them, as well as many 
^* Other vegetable, we are informed by Diod<H^us 



\ 



16S 

t 

" Siculus, that by the regulations relating to diet^ 
" observed in the different Egyptian provinces, 
" onions were prohibited in some, but allowed in 
" others. 

" Like the old Egyptians, the Gipseys cannot 
*' bear the smell of beans ; although their neigh- 
**^ hours, the Wallachians, eat them with pleasure. 

" When I was at Denta, in the district of 
" Csakowa, curiosity led me into a Gipsey hut. 
" The first object which arrested my attention was 
" a young man covered with the itch, whose mo- 
" ther was feeding him with the boiled flesh of a 
" small snake, on a dirty earthen plate.-^In the 
" same manner the Egyptians used the flesh of 
" snakes, as the mildest and most effectual remedy 
" for the elephantiasis. 

" It is well known that, even to this day, fowls 
" and others of the feathered tribe are hatched by 
" art in Egypt. — I must confess I was not a little 
" surprised when, in July, 1775, I went into a Gip- 
" sey hut before Karansebes, to find an old woman 
" engaged in hatching geese and ducks eggs, in 
•* horse-dung. This was exactly the method of 
the old Egyptians. 

From all which has hitherto been produced, 
** as well as that the Gipse} s of the Banat, and 
•* others dispersed over the rest of Europe, declare 
" themselves to be trom Eg}'pt, it is highly pro- 
^ bable that they are of Eg} ptian origin. But sec 



M 

it 



159 

* 

** a nearer resemblance. So long ago as in iElianV 



^i 



time, the Egyptians were famous for their pa- 
"** tience in enduring all kinds of torture ; and 
^' would rather expire on the rack, than be brought 
^* to confession ; which is a striking trait in the 
*^* character of the Gipseys. When this equivocal 
" means of learning the truth, the torture, was 
" practised in the imperial royal hereditary domi- 
" nions, several instances may be remembered of 
*^ the Gipseys suffering themselves to be torn to 
"pieces sooner than acknowledge crimes, even 
" when the magistrates had the most indisputable 
" proofs of them." 

Thus far has been to prove the Egyptian de- 
scent of the Gipseys. What follows is against 
it; and, from the similarity of their condition, is 
to convince us that they are of -/Ethiopian and 
Troglodytish origin. 

" According to the most authentic writers, the 
Egyptians were solicitous to build themselves 
con venient habitations. They lived decently; 
^* and their attention to cleanliness, in the ob- 
** servance of pertain rules of health, was so ge- 
** neral, that even the peasants, and the lowest 
" classes of people in the nation, were no excep- 
" tion to it. — ^The residences of the Gipseys in the 
" Banat present a very different picture....Miserable 
* dwellings, consisting, partly of thorns and straw 
" packed together, .and partly of holes, ten or 






\ 



u 



160 

" twelve feet deep, dug in tl^ earth. Taken in 
" this point of view, the Gipseys have more the 
" appearance of being related to the hordes of 
"Ethiopians and Troglodytes. 

" Among the ancient Egyptians, agriculture was 
" in high esteem ; as it still is among the present 
Copts, their true descendants. — ^The Gipseys, on 
the contrary, are the worst, and most careless 
" farmers : another argument for their being Ethi- 
" opians and Troglodytes. 

" These and other African hordes, -employ thetn- 
" selves in collecting gold out of the river sand ; — 
"in like manner, the Marosch, Nera, and other 
" streams, have induced ' the Gipseys to become 
"gold washers. 

" An inclination for strolling, to which the 
" Egyptians were so very adverse, is the particular 
" propensity of the Gipseys in general ; nor are 
" those of the Banat exempt from it. . 

" The more artful, particularly of the other sex, 
go about from house to house, where they tell 
fortunes, cast nativities, discover thefts, and pre- 
" tend they possess remedies, to which they ascribe 
" wonders and infallible cures. These nostrums 
" consist, chiefly, of roots, amulets, certain small 

" stones mostly a kind of scoriae. — Among the 

" Egyptians, likewise, such impostors rambled up 
" and down. These were Ethiopians by descenf, 
" who carried on a similar trade. 



it 



I6l 

" From the last considerations, compared with 
" the foaiier, one would be inclined rather to de- 
" duce the origin of the Gipseys from the Ethi- 
" opians and Troglodytes, than from the Egyp- 
" tians. But what I am going to add, will make 
" it more probable that they are a mixture of all 
•* the three nations *". 

*Mt is well known that people of both se^es, 
" calling themselves Egyptian priests and priest- 
" esses, were, in ancient times, scattered through 
" Italy, Greece, and all the provinces of tlie Roman 
" empire : where they not only introduced the 
" worship of the goddess Isis, but wandered from 
" place to place, begged, and professed the same 
" kinds of ingenuity in which the Gipseys of the 
" Banat, and the rest of their brethren dispersed 
"over Europe, are so thoroughly versed. These 
" said priests and priestesses, which Apuleius ironi- 
" cally calls tnagnce religionis sidera, net onlyj^ 
" knocked at people's doors, in Rome, with their 
** sistris, . but even had the skill to persuade tlie 
*' common people, that to refuse them alms and to 
" commit sacrilege were .equally .heinous.. They 
** even went so far as to threaten those who sligl^ 
*^ ed them, in the name of their goddess Isis, jtp 



♦ Griselini alway» mistakes Troglcdytes for a particular na- 
tional-appellation, which is just as if we wero to suppose Nomades 
to be the fiamc.of a pepplc. 



I6i 

•** strike them with blindness, or the tympany \ 
" (hydrops tympanites). — A ventin says, the Gipseys. 
" could so terrify the people in Bavaria, with the 
" like threats, that they suffered themselves to be 
"robbed by them with impunity. Likewise in 
" the Banat, the women, particularly, are heard to 
" vent the most horrid curses and imprecations if 
" they are reprimanded, or not paid for their cal- 
" culations of nativities, singing, or fortune-telling. 

" The licentiousness and immorality of the Gip- 
" seys are extreme. In early youth, when yet 
" young girls, they exhibit themselves, with their 
" dances, before every person from whom they 
"expect any present; and these dances always 
" end in lascivious attitudes and shaipefui ges- 
" tures. In like manner, the ordinary women in 
"Egypt used to dance at their orgies, especially 
" at the feast of Bubostes, and the procession of 
" Canopus* The like scenes appeared at Rome, 

among the wives, daughters, and sponsors of ihe 

priests of Isis, agreeably to the mysteries of that 

goddess.'^ 

Griselini now comes to the point: — ^To what ' 
nation did thesie priests and priestesses belong? 
And when did their emigration happen? 

It was after the time of Augustus," be says, 

that they began to wander through the different 
" part;s of Europe ; in every district of which, they 
*' endeavoured to disseminate the worship of Isis. 



(C 






WS 

^' 1%ry fTftßtked'lifltroiogy, wd ^cther irfnds ofiu^ 
^ ^eiaititiou^ impositioni, wi^ nU M^Tt% of vagrants^ 
'^ tndos» b urariy the ^stooc mamipr m the CHpsejrs 
" of otur 9gc deceive people* 

^^ NoHr tt is feMwn 4ähat the Egyptian priests 
^ liad ^ttted inowies, itqm approfiriated lands ; 
** vrbich circimistMice attached them to their native 
^' coutttry; and hence they hated an unsettled itfe. 
** Neither did they deaine to makie proselytes ; and 
^ straagerSy vrho wished to be initiated into the 
^ lites and mysteriea of Isis^ were obliged to sub* 
^ jntt to be circuBicised ijr^his cereniony was in- 
^dispemabie: on the oootraiy, the before-men- 
^ tsoned priests of Isis urandertng about tl>e Roman 
^ pMnrinces, never mentioned a word of eircumci- 
^* sioQ to their new converts. Very sensible critics 
^* have produced palpable evidence that they were 
^' Ethic^ians and Troglodytes, who could the mo/e 
^ easily pass for Egyptians, as their features, per- 
'' sons, customiB, and neligion, were the same. 

"Of all the writers who mention these emigra- 
^ tions» from Egypt, into Italy^ Greece, and 
^ every part of the globe which was known in the 
^' time of the Romans, I ^all refer only to Helio- 
"dorus. It was very possible that, somettnies, 
''^ seal JSgyptians who had been driven by misfor- 
*^ tallies from dieir native country, or perhaps some 
^ of the very lowest rank of people who had 90^ 
^< dung to kwe^ might be mi»d with these ww- 

N 



fe6 

«lust be trogtbäytieft ant) filÜdofliäns, h^MSe 
they follow the fiftiplqyttiettt of gcWirashiög ; fhwc 
. latter, äs WeW to sdttit* ^f the AfViean iierde*, db 
Hie sahie iü thfeir risers MrWth |rroÄüce ^^old : *e 
ihakto them Ejgyptian», hwatlte thty^ cat 3whie\! 
flesh : again, hk coneludes they tmist be priesb 
of I^is, bec^u^ they exdahn against ihe tiaid- 
hearted, who refuse the boon they ask. Are these, 
then, diStittfetiöns wlirch none hut Egy p ti a ns and 
ISthiopiäiüs have in common with the -Gipseys? 
is It neöesSafy to rtcur to the Egyptians, to find 
^ople, beside 'Gipseys, who eat pork?-^Or to ^ 
priests off läis, for sturdy beggats? And, with it- 
gärd to gotdWashers, how came he hot to tecolfect 
that the Wallachians also follow this employment? 
•—And that near Strasburgh, beside other pfctces, 
hundreds of people who have not a drop 6f Oipsey 
blood in their veins get their living by it? 

J?ürth6r, the said Mr. iGrrisehni, in order to 
render his systeih the more plausible, has made 
use of certain expedients at the expense of truth ; 
and, in spite of all experience to the contrary, ^ 
Äiödelled the properties of the Oipseys, as to ghrc 
them the appearance of complete Egyptians. He 
makes therti by nature inclined to melancholy; 
whereat their dispositions have not the least 
tincture of it: they are described as most cos* 
scientiously, nay rather superstitiously, j^ttaclMd 
to religious customs; and yet, «coordiog to die 



I 



167 

ü^oiver^l tc^timouy of othgt ohmy^n gf tlics^ 
^pi^ they wp totally mdifFcycent; aa to qv^ry 
^ug; conncictecl witji r«;ligiQ9. Hff sagrs, tbej^ ar^ 
^versje to catiog qnippsi; attd ^, for beaus, th?^ 
a^llQi; tbew : ^ber^ask Sul?;?r WW ^ witues». t^ow 
9ViQh they IJk^d th« flavotti; pf both* Jly, i^ropeed;: 
iRg ui this «iaj?ner, ev^y X^ixn^ q?ay Iw ipadp to 
9l]f9W«r all purpoßQ3, ßut wpe tp th? i^f Wr*% ai>4 
^jtqries vbicb are u^ed in tbi?^ TOiSHWÄ? I 

Jt will be sec?i ffoqa wJjl^t ba;? l??qn ?ftid| pf^ tbp 
W^U^t, that the sypppsed Egypt»» (J^jscwt of t^fi 
Gipseys is very far from b?in^ pTOVeclj noJ:V;itlji- 
st^ndiQg it wa» fornierly 3.9 generally (jreidijtcd, 
aud eve» is to thi^ day. Arguing on, tbe ?MPB^i* 
tioa th^it they originated frpjrp Jplgypt, 9are Vifas 
Xsik^n to intpnn ys what l^ind of people^ they h^ 
becu in that country. Jt i? very cpnfickntly rela|r 
ed, apd tp Our great editicatiw, that tUeir f^jr^r 
forhers were tbe same Sprperers vvbp, in the prf ^flP^ 1 
pf Phar^pb, ijnitated Mose^l nuiael?^; n^püi^ove^ 
that the Egyptian king; spt tb?sf pep^lif 9^ taalf^ 
jna^ters over the childjp^a of Israel, i^ order t9 
jijnder their laboyjp the ipore grievous; ^^d ti»al|jg^ 
jhat Jbese were the y^ry myrderer^ ^uigipyed bs - 
tbe iphuman Herpcj^ to carry into jftgct btf m^ 
decree respecting the children of Be^thlebeni. Thjl 
kind of dreaiping has been cs^rned iiffi\\ further; 
it having been calculated tp what df^gr^c Qf i.Q* 
dolpnce \^^^ pepjplf had ^^c^sj^^f^^^^ til^q^y^^ 



168 

in Egypt, living by the labour and sweat of others. 
Afterwards, when, contrary to expectation, the 
Children of Israel escaped from their servitude, 
the lucrative employment of these overseers, of 
course, had an end : instead of reconciling them, 
selves to any kind of labour, they rather chose to 
decamp, with goods, wives, and children, from . 
Egypt, in hopes, by cunning arid fraud, to procure 
an easier subsistence in foreign countries. They 
pursued this shameful coui*se of life through the 
following centuries ; and have, at last, {>ushed 
their excursions into our territories. 

But it is not sufficient that the Egyptian descent 
of these people is entirely destitute of proof; oft 
the other side, the most positve proof is to be found 
to contradict it Their language differs entirely 
from the Coptic ; and their customs, as Ahasuerus 
Fritsch has remarked, are diametrically opposite to 
th^ Egyptian. To these facts must be added that 
weighty circumstance, of their wandering about 
like strangers in Egypt, where they form a distinct 
people; as not only Bellonius, but many later 
i^vriters as$u^e us. Muratori, therefore, is not in 
the wrong, M|rKe|| he thinks it ridiculous to account 
them Egyptians-r-people having no better authority 
for this belief, thai^ t}>eir own' unsupported opinion* 

Thus» then, standi t^i? argument, as well with 
fespect to the derivation of the Gipseys in general, 
^ m regard to the Egyptian ^99cent of them in par- 



169 

ticukr. While many men, and among these some 
very respectable for their learning, declare the 
origin of these peopte ^ to remain an unsolved 
riddie, the opinion that they were not originally 
from Egypt, will, it is thought, by the contents 
of this and the foregging chapter, be thoroughly 
confirmed. Notwithstanding the innumerable re- 
searches„ the Gipseys still remain unacknowledged 
inpiates in Europe. 

It may ' nevertheless be doubted whether Swin* 
bume is quite right, in asserting it to be impossible 
ever to ' find out the real home of these strangers. 
After, so many unsuccessful endeavours, it is not 
without apprehension, though with the best-found- 
ed hope, we venture on another trial. 



m 



I 

# I 



CH AFTER V. 

The Gipsofs come from tiin^tan. 

tf isjüuly asdertecii, thätbne of the niost m^fllbte 
methods öi difterminingf the origin t^ theM peo^ 
«rith (Äftäiiity^ would be the d&coverjr of t 
country where their language was in comnian xOfL 
The fir^t and ihdtt necessary examination here^ 
thetefore, will be, to find out the part of the globe 
in which the Gipseys* language is that of the na- 
tives ; and this country is no other than Hindostan. 
But before we endeavour to prove this assertion, 
by a comparison of the Mindostan and Gipsey 
languages, it will be proper to premise something, 
which will serve as an introduction of considerable 
weight It is an article of intelligence;, to be found 
in the Vienna Gazette, and comes from a Captain 
Szekely von Doha, a man who was thinking of 
nothing less than of searching for the Gipseys 
and their language in the East Indies. 

" In the year 1763, on the 6th of November," 
says Captain Szekely, '' a printer, whose name 
''was Stephen Pap Ssathmar Nemethi, came to 
*' see me. Talking upon various subjects, we at 
^ last fell upon that of the Gipseys ; and my guest 
'' related to me the following anecdote, from the 
^ mouth of a preacher of Uie reformed chwcb, 



vrt 

'' Swpbeiji V2L% at Almssch in the cöonty of 
'* KoiDoraf-^When the said Vali ftudied at the 
*^ university of Lej^den» he was intimately ae« 
** <)uainted with some young Matal»arS| of whom [ 
** three are obliged Constantly to study there, nor * 
^* can they return home tiB relieved by three others. ! 
'^ Having observed that their native language bore i 
^ a great affinity to that spoken by the Gifweys, i 
^* be availed himself of the opportunity to naif' 
** down, from themselves, upwards of one thMsandi 
•* Words, together with their significations. Thcyi 
'* assured him, at the same time^ that upon their: 
^^ island was a tract of land, ox province, called' 
" Czigania (but it is not laid down on the map). ' ^ 
** After Vali was returned from the university, 
** he informed himself, among the Raber Gipseys, 
'' concerning the meaning of his Malabar words, 
^' which they explained without trouble or hesita- 
"tion-" 

In this anecdote, every thing seems to happen 
by chance ; even to' the learned man who published 
it in the Gazette, it appeared as if fallen from the 
clouds, and entirely oversets his system ; for he 
was the person, mentioned above, who broached 
the opinion of the Gipseys being Mongol Tartars* 
So much more weighty, therefore, and unexcep- 
tionable, are the hints it throws cot,, for the 
discovery of the Gipseys^ mother country, by'i^euns 
of their language. 



17« 

The cohsideration that, according to this 
dote, the Gipsey laugu^tge is declared to -be MalabaBr- 
and we have pronounced it Hiudostan, does no'tf 
create any difficulty, although they arc very dif^ 
ferent from each other. Prohnbly the three young* 
men, from- whom Vali took down his words, were 
Bramins* sons, whose language was that proper to 
the learned Braniins, or the Shanscritt But the 
affinity between this and the common language 
spoken by the people of Hindostan, is the same 
as between pure Latin and modern Italian. It was 
therefore very natural that the Raber Gipseys 
should understand, if not all, at least the greatest 
part of the words which Vali repeated to them. 
. However, we do not want this coaie*off. Tl^ 
difficulty will subside without it, when we examine 
the connection between the Gipsey and Hindost&n 
languages. The next thing, tberefore» is to give 
a list of words from both. 



Gipsej, 


HindostaQ. 


lEnglith. 


Ick; Ek 


Ek 


One 


Duj; Doj 


Du 


Two 


Trm; Tn 


Tin 


Three 


Schtar; Star 


Tschar 


Four 


PatU$ch; Pansch 


\ Pansch • 


Five 


Sof 


ITscAo 


Six 




Efia 


Hejfta; Sat * 


Seven 


Ochto 


Aute 


£«ht 




173 

Clt-3K 

-,.. Now 

^''"''"*- Ukto Paj^» The Second 

O Vuito ; a J^"*' tistera »jhe f out» 



Ten 
Twenty 

Thirty 
Porty 

Fifty 

Sixty 
Seventy 

Bghty 

Ninc^ 
Hundted 



T»s$er« 



Tim* 
AVear 



Wakht 



Bat ^Fatir;^^^ 

Feurtfe Btwar 

Knrko Tschis 

Doga Tulad; RyK«*" ^„^ _._ 

^ ^** Moffiki TheManoet 

Arti Gi«ttfr;Moth^ ^^ 

GoJBPro Tschan-, l^^ TheN»"«**' 

Jek ; Otter ^^^^ah 

pie .De^^^aKhoda-, Allah Ood 



A Month 
pay 

Night 
Morning 

The Sex 
The Sort 



174 



Deuw ' Deuw ; M ure t 

BoUopen ; BoIibeQ Dune 

Mulro Dutnin 

Sie; Wode Jan 

Trupo; Teschta Dhj ; Ang ; Hal 

Sbweto;T8cberosz B^bescht ; Aäinaii 

Tserhenje; Im 

Tseherhenja S 
Cham; Cam ; Okam Kam ; Suiez 

Prabal Howab 

Jag ; Jak ; Jago Ag 
Panj; Pango Panj 

Beiar ; Batas 
Baddel 
Bjdscbelj 
Meg 



Balwal, Bear 
Feiboescbnodi 
Feibescbine 
Tscbetogasch 
JBrisckint; Brt" 7 b- « 
chindo I ^"•*" 

Mrascba; OkH 



Koeddo 

Temm 

Akra 

Hedjo 

JBar 

Gere ; Wcrmo 

Wesch 

Baro Pani 

Sero 

Kunara ; Parra 



Tata Panj ; Poftchi Tschata 



Kobassa; Osh 

Kobassa ; kohol 

Muiuk 

Moidan 

Pahr 

Pjtter; Kaja 

Gerrak 

Deriauvr 

Dschjl 

KinerJ 



Han^ ; Foljasi 

Hanj; Ifanik 

Tallo 

Flammus 

Jangar ; Anear 

Mommli ; Mui9/eli Batthi 

S<?bik Moil 



Pobara 
Huah; Koka 
Tallauw 
Tjm ; Ltt 
Koyia 



An Idol 
The W^H 
The «pmt 
Tb/eäiQ«) 
Ttee ft«^ 
Heaven 

A Star 

Tbe Sub 

Tbe Mqqii 

The Air 
lire 
W ater 

Tbe Earth 

TheWin4 
A Cloud 
Lightening 
Thunder 

Bain 

Tbe Dew 

Fog 

The Soil 

Tbe Field 

A Mountain 

AHillodc 

A Pit 

An Island 

The Ocean 

The Sea 

Tbe Shore 

Morass; Slou^ 

A Spring 

AWeU 

A Dike 

Flame 

Coal 

WgiU 

Mtt4 



m 




Tacliiiio 
MoUtm9 
Tsindo rap 
Lokm; Lm 



Liüia 
Keller 
Mmlmm 
Fkint 



^tf jmIuu momdli Gtmdem 
Ckar;T9chgri iß 



<?t 6 ; Arpa 
*I*zirja: Pmm 
ISHinim ; Lol^ranim 
Schach 



^Dodoiii 

JHerbuiho 

JBobarka 

Hiik 

Pabuj 

Brohl 

T61el 

Kinno 

Itezh 



GoU 



1 



Birlin 

Jerni 

Gwju ; Mescho 

Kirja 

Jua ; Tzua 

Puzhum : Pn^chtm 



Jou 

Ljsan 

Peiar 

Kobj 

Mytter 

Holla 

Terbui 

Birka 

Garsch 

Pavug; Sjuw 

Prohlo 

Jaau¥rr 

iCentstihuwa 

Rissem 

Mumukkj ; Sehe* 

hetkj 
Mum 
Schahed 
Kir9 ; Techontj 

Fjschr 



TU 

Lewi 

QuidcahE« 

Sah 

Sakoetre 

SalplMT 

Grass 

UHieat 
B ar l ey 
Garlic 
Oaiaii 

Cabbage 



AGoavd 
AMeim 
A Cucumber 
AlVee 
Aa Afij^ 
A Pear 
ABeatt , 
A Worm 
Silk 

JABee 

Waic 
Honey 
An Ant 
A^Louee 
A Flea 



176 

ffiadoittii« 

cho; Mulo 5 
Alo Bam 

Bischothilo Ghido 

^»E^*»?''*' JHans 
Hiretza; Retschori Buttugh 

Jaros; GamiQ Unnda 

Ra Bira ; Hundar 

Tschikel 3 

Scho9ehi; Tschasckai Sassa ; Khurr 
Papinori Boner 

Gru ; Grea ; Kr^ Gorra ; 6has»i 
Gratick ; GroMt Gorra 
Gratrnf; Graxkm Gqrrj 
Deraaffresch Bi^heru 

'^'^'^^' }c<>r«;Boil 

Warjohilo Batschera 

*«*~ i Meadhi 

^Sai***"* } Mendhj baucha 

Jeschineingri ; ) 
Ketschka ^ j 
Bah; Balm Pala; Snr 

Bikarisch krohilo Sur 
Bal6ra Sorbatscha 



} 



Fish 
An Eel 
A Bird 
The Eagle 
A Groose 
A Duck 
A Dove 
An Egg 
The lion 
A Wolf 

A Dog 

A Hare 
An Ape 
A Horse 
A Stallion 
A Mare 
A Foal 

An Ox 



} 



A Cow 

A Calf 

A Sheep 

A Lamb 

A Goat 

A Swme 
ABoar 
A Kg 



177 



Qifmy. 



ba 


Beng ; Mendowk 


A Ftog ■ 




Sarap 


A Snake 




Quddj 


ADtason 


t; Kancht 


Lakerj 


Wood 


Mm ,- Borka 


Tschkl 


The Bark 


fit 


Pai 


A Leaf 


• 

n 


Mirritz 


Pepper 


Pal 


Bäl 


The Hair 


urn 


Ojr 


Wool 




Dum 


The Tail 


t 


Lohu 


Blood 




Dhud 


Milk 




Kel; Mukken 


Butter 


;Cbii«I; 
ras 


JPanjr 


Cheese 




Tschjli 


Fat 




Anm 


A Tear 


, Mbsz 


Ghost 


Flesh 


To;Schero. 


^l^er 


The Head 


\eru 




Jaok;Ja^ 
; Po; Aran 


]Awk 


The%e 




Kazca 


The Ear 


•% 


Na*i 


The Nose 


\fa 


Gal 


TheCheel^ 


mmedini 


Thori 


A Slap on the Face 
The Beard . 


)r 


Dharri 


: Moi 


Mu 


The Mouth 


• 


Dant 


A Tooth 


b; Tscheb 


Mb 


The Tongue 
The Neck 




Gerdheh ; GuUa 


mo 


Pitch 


The Back 


irik 


Terrik 


The Side 


; Buhl 


Tschutter 


The Behind 


I 


Tsehatti 


The Breast 




Pitch 


The Belly 


iin; Mucia 


Bhaa; Hateh 


The Arm 


.; Wass 


Hatch 


The Hand 


lilo; (iuzh- 

: Gujsto 


J Awngli 


A Finger 



17S 



Ghazdo; Paltco 



Pitv 
Tsckanga 
Naj 

^ic; Si 
Buko 
Buchlipen 
Rundo 
Geo 

But; Behjr 
Pisla 

Lowe ; Lowe 
Libn^ 

Jemia; Miga 
Buda; Purana 
Tsckiwawa 
Rikewela 
. Sunjo 
Sung 
Sik 

Rakerpen; Rak* 
ribea; Tscbip 
Lab; Alo 
Nao; l^mt 
Liel 
Buchos 
Schin 
Pfi/; Pos 
Baxt 

Dromnaadiedfun 
Sik 
Meria 
Bkd 

Truzhilo 
Sentinelia 
Sowawa 

mk 

Döko 
Gha$ 
Butia 



} 



Angina 
Tingeri 
Par; Pauw 
Gunga 
Nauh 

Sjiger 

Jagga 

Nala 

Gibah; Tsched 

Pot 

Toro 

Peysaa 

Sere 

Koss 

Potdjna 

Tiuw; Ratbhafa 

Ehad 

Sunnj 

Sunkh 

Tschik 

Bat; Juvanj 

Bat; Kelam 

Nam 

Khutt 

Ketab 

Rengeh 

Puai 

Bukktj 

Aheb;Tiffiuitt 

Millet 

Mordanj; Mat 

Buk ^ 

Peas 

Para ; Tschokkj 

Mjn; Kbdb 

Dirk 

Domm 

Kauf 

Kar; Kan 



The Thumb 
The Leg 
The Foot 
TheKoee 
A Finger MtU 
The Heart 
TheLivet 
A Place 
A District 
Ä Hole 
A Multitude 
A Scarcity 
Money 

A Pousd 

A Mile 

Age 

Life 

TheMemoqr 
The Hearing 
The smell 
The Taste 

The Speech 

A Word 

A Name 

An Epktle 

A Book 

Colour 

Straw 

Fortune 

Error 

Diligence 

Death 

Hunger 

Thirst 

Watching 

Sleep 

Smart 

The Breatlii 

A Cough 

Labour 



179 



Hindostan. 



Mekljm 
Zükhipj ; Gatel 
Gurr; Havel) 
Tschater 
Kassi; Jutu 



. Giptej. 

katella 
laneben 

jter; Chor 

• 

i 

owo ; Tschabo Lirrka 
e; Tschaj Tschuknj 

abe ; Tschawo Tschokna 
ek Tschekerin 

e; Dadi Bab 

Daju; Dajo Ma 

awo ; Schave Beth 

laj ; Schaj 

akrorum 

> 

5s Krupral 

ts Kripea 

li' 

to 

• 

« 

thus 
da 

rwawa 
jum 



Bethj 
Jamwatsch 



English. 

t 

Ba!lsam 

A Wound 

A House 

A Tent; Roof 

A Wife 

A Child 

A Gill , 

A Boy 

A Virgin 

A Father 

A Mother 

A Grandmothef 

A Son 

A Daughter 

Son-in-law 



Tsche-tscherabbaisCousin 

Tschatscha Father's brother 

Tschatschi Father's Sister 

Rhenduj ; Rand A Widow 

Noker ; Tschaker Man Servant 

Tschakerin Maid Servant 

Gurkka-Suheb A Landlord 

Seratsch ; Kham An Inn 



Talima 
Sowal 
B^n ; Jivab 
Ürrizi 



gawa 

sari ; Sidah 

iheskro 

ipen 

itra 

orori 

en 

lustri; Gost^ 7 ># * • 
' r» J • >Amutri 
ig ; Gusdenn j ® 



Scheggar 
Kele; Notsch 
Serinda 



Instruction 
A Question 
An Answer 
A Petition 
The Chase 
A Huntsman 
A Game 
A Violin 



Tscherjfi; Konkatj Poverty 



Musafferj 



er; Tober 

lari 
upni 
or 
orda$ 



Kulhari 
Mes f Tukhta 
Piala ; Tsghasj 
Tschabukk 
Tschur 
Tschurj 



A Voyage ; Journey 
A Ring , 

An Ax ; A Bin 
A Board 
A Cup 
A Whip 
A Thief 
A Theft 



Gipwy. 

Goro; Chadum 

Pleisserdum 

Tschatscho 

Saro ; Birda 

Tchumoben 

Dori 

Mänru; Maro . 

Jaro ; Aro 

Gab^a 

Kjl 

Kaja ; Rajah 

Ranj 

Raz 

Buklo 

Kuroben 

Kutwnaskro 

Harmi 

Puschka; Banduk 

GaM«,-Gal; Jegag 

Tombun 

Kandim momelli 

Thu 

Paka ^ 

Palmande 

Romm ; Manusch 

Jammadar 

Klusturi ' 

Kangri; Kangheri 

Isba 

Skaurnin 

Kambana 

Gow'r 

Doga 

Nani kek 

Schut 

Ker; Baua 

Klidin 

Schoste 

Koro 

Kuni 

KtUschahu 



178 

HindosUn« 

Dhoro ; Krjs 

Masuri 

Jnsaf; Sjera 

Bharr; Birz 

Tschuma 

Sudj ; Fjtha 

Rutj 

Jtd; Moidda 

Konna 

Mukken 

Raja 

Raji 

Raz ; Surdari 

Koluff 

Jungro 

Gardj ; Tscholdar 

Hattiar 

Sanduk 

Gauw ; Busti 

Tumbur 

Genden 

Dhuah 

Bosu 

Musaka 

Murd; Manusch 

Surrdar 

Takkor bar 

Musizam 

Ischba; Kuterj 

Tschukire 

Guntha Ghittal 

Kibr 

Tschjs 

Quotsch-netsch 

Sirrka 

Havelj ; Emarat 

Tschabj ; KUi 

Petschamma 

Kurti 

Map ; Kejasa 

Kitseh 



A Sword ; Daggei 

A Reward 

Right 

Weight ; Burthej 

A Kiss 

A Band 

Bread 

Meal 

Food ; Eatables 

Butter 

The Prince 

The Princess 

The Principality 

A Castle 

War 

A Warrior 

A Breastplate 

A Musket 

A ViUage 

A Drum 

Brimstone 

Smoke 

The Wing 

The Rear 

Man, Mankind 

Commander 

A Cloister 

A Church 

Apartment 

A Chair 

ABeU 

The Grave 

The Matter 

Nobody 

Vinegar 

An Edifice 

A Key 

Drawers 

A Coat 

A Measure 

Potter's Ckf 



179 



Gipsej. 



mi 

mawa 

> 

; For 



fho4 Matzlin Mudkj 



Hindoaliii« 
G(ng 

Angur ; Scbrab 

Karamitti 

Savin 

Guna 

Kissa 

Parr ; Par 



A Sausage 

Wine 

Chalk 

Soap 

Accusation; Debt 

A Knapsack 

A Feather 

A Hy 



QipHj. 



Adjectives. 

Hindoitan. 



ker 


Jssekta; Hakabat 


} 


Purana ; Buda 


tino 


Pagia 


jerdo 


Tschinta 


TO 


Nenga 


[Ialsch;'Erio 


Budd;Khrab- 


äila 


Tschaura 


er; Adtdto 


Duara 




Schano ; Pittla 


ori ropen 


Kambukht 


ro 


Ekara 


ima^ter 


Netko ; Kemed 


;bila; Win^o Juta 


o 


Nerassa 




Kalasch 




Sumittscba 


1 


Burra 


;ho 


Bala 


>rero 


Budd-siifft 




Ünsct^a 


\ 


Buka 


'fi 


rBenka ; Tera 


? ; Tigno 


Tengna 


P 


Linifra ; Aftara 


s;BetschukierDjia; DerrUehka 


1 


Jeura 


\o 


Bif^a 


1 


Nßia 



Respectable 

Old 

Simple 

Known 

Bare 

Wicked 

Broad 

Double 

Thin 

Miserable 

Single 

Eternal 

Ealte 

Dark 

Free 

Entire 

Great 

Good 

Ugly, Hateful 

Hungry 
Cjooked 
Short 
Lame 

Stow 

Powerfiil 

Wet 

New 

.02 



182 



Oipiejr. 


Hindostan. 


English. 


Barwello 


Matwir ; Talivirr 


Rich 


Kalo ; Kala 


Kala ; Sjah 


Black 


Mitschach 


Tik 


Severe 


Bkarahilo 


Barri 


Heavy 


Oudio 


Mitha 


Sweet 


Gor 


Gehera 


Deep 


Merla ; Mojas 


Mua ; Whakka 


Dead 


Schukrohilo 


Sukka 


Dry 


Gojemen 


Kuffa 


Arrogant 


But 


Bot ; Fatta 


Much 


Perdo 


Purra ; Bharra 


Full 


Massob 


Kaberdar 


Watchful 


Tscha 


Sutscha 


True 


Tatto ; Tatip 


Grorm 


Warm 


Parna 


Safibd ; Vjela 


White . 


Dur 


Tschaura 


Far 


Naneleskeksi 


Tschimmero 


Tough ' 



Cipaty. 

Riokerwawa 

Wias 

Kovokardas 

JWkimdas 

Pekgum 

Tsc^l 

Mcmgatcü 

Gohena 

PÄkjnm 

Bamiopem 

Lut>ekirdaspas 

Pnd 

Prottenlum 

TscktrxMlm stele 

Ptnh 

SiiMum 



Verbs. 

Mul-kurma To esteem 

Pontschna To arrive 

Lusgauna To entice 

SrAiM-kurma To charge 

Tamburme-fwAftaviuiTo bake 
Hilma To shake 

Memgmm To beg 

Bjramet-kumia To cheat 

. Turauna 
Iktmdma 

Zanakan-kunroa 
Derkarhuna 
Dantna 
&*r-katQa 
Bkmrrmm 

Pukkema; Boyoia To seise 
KmtiM 



To break 

To bind 

To commit adol^^ 

To be poor 

To threat«! 

To behead 

To accomplish 



To eat 

Audrvk^asunrkoido/aniir; Lu^s^^uoa To Ifetter 
>f «kA T^^jUutt . To dow 



183 



Gipitj. 

Jarawe 

Muterwawa 

Bango 

Getschaha 

Ghas 

Nazh 

Kindjell^ 

Tschumedele 

Savva 

Muk 

Schiwawa 

Tscharawa 

Deletschedöman 

Gochobea » 

Kerla 

Siwawa 

Lawa 

Nabe 

Tschikatele 

Barreskro 

Sennelowisa 

Dias brischeudo 

Zhinawd 

Tsatschobea 

Songawa ; Sung 

Pennawa 

Tschinnawa 

Giuwawa 

Limmaugi 

Zamander 

Zhinffer 

Kärj 

Kuroben 
Bezhawna; Bezh 
Tschor 
Mujas; Mulo 

Mi 



Hindostan. 



En^Iif}^. 



I fear 
Jirrna ; Dirrhuna To fear 



Mutna 

Liagra huna 

Jauna 

Kassi-kutms^ , 

Schegar-kurrna 

Mul-leaä." 

Tschumauna 

m 
_«_ . 

HussQa 

Mukhset-kuvnidL 
Jjaa 

Tschatria . 
Sulah-huna 
Jut bolena 
Kurrna 
Siwena 

Lena ;'Pukkerna 
Nomdena 
^Tschi'kurma 

Barretsch-kurrna, 
Djwana huna 
Birrsna 



Ginna ; Tikna 
Jnsaf dena 

Sunkhna;Bokurm9LTo smell 
Kabena ; Bolena To say 
Karat-kurrna ' 



To make water 
To halt (go lame) 
To go ahy-where 
To cough 
To hunt 
To buy- 
To kiss 
She kisses 
To laugh 
To leave 
To live 
To lick 
To lie down 
To lye 
To make 

To sew 

To take 

To name 

To sneeze 

He sneezes * 

To boast 

To be mad ; to rave 

To rain 

It did rain 

To reckon 

-To right one 



ongna 



tejauna 



Guwefia 

Kurrauna 

Judda-kurrna 

Galljdena 

Urauna 

Kassb-kurma 

Bahetna 

Tschure-k^XTtiSL 

Muena 

Duntena 

Lena 



To saw 
To sing 
To provide 
To divide 
To scold 
To shoot 
To slay 
To sit 
To steal 
To die 
To seek 
To carry 



I8f 



Giptej. 
Luno 


HindoffeUL 

ZummaJcurrna 


To marry 


ICurohen 


Marna 


To meet 


Flava; Pi 


Piena 


To drink 


Pnro 


Purana 


To grow obsolete 


Latsakerjl 


Benschna 


ToseU 




Tschinna 


To know 


Me tschana 




I know 


Tzawari 


Jada-kurrna 


To bewitch 




Dekkna 


To see 


He dikkaha 




I saw 




Suna. 


To hear 


Ne schunele 


1 


I do not hear 



Example how the two Languages decline. 
1. Without being joined to au Adjective. 



Singular Numbbe. 



Osdfo 

Gadseffcero 

Gad2sfco 

Gadzo 

OGadj» 

fiadmiBv; ^^<i— ^ 



Ivadse 

Cadzei^ftr» 
^Oadieitfo 

OGad» 

Qadaaadar 1 GadMBM 



Adam» 
Adamite 
Adamite 

Adamt; Adanjte 
P Adämi 



A Man 

Of the Man 

To the Man 

The Man 

OMan 

firom, with the Man 



Flubal Numbbr, 



AdamJM» 
Adamjonte 
Adamjimte 

Adaoym; AdamJMte 
O AdünnJMi 



Men 

OftheM«n 

To the Men 

The Men 

OMen 

fron, wHh the Men 



SiNGUtAB NVMBB^. 



Xafidi 

Kafidjotero 
K«fidjate 
Kafidi 
OKafidi 



Met 

Mette 
Meate 

Me«; Meate 
OMes 



The Table 

OftheTeUe 

To the Table 

The Table 

O Table 

ftoB» with the Tal^f 



ICafidje 
Kaftdjatert 



Plubai^ Npmbbb« 



M< 
MeMte 



TbeT^biea 
Of the Table« 



183 



Gipsej. 

Kafidjei^ MeMÜco 

Kafidja Mate 

O KafiJja O MeM 

lUfidJQiifiar; Kafidjsie Meteic 



Hindoftm. 



To the Tables 

The Table» 

O Tablet 

from, with the TaUei 



2« Wiüi an Adjective« 
Singular Number. 



Barabalo 

Baribalia 

BaribaUi 

Barabalu 

OBarabaUt 

Bari balitter; baUsM 



Barabalcoi « 

Ban balen 

Ban balea 

Bam balen 

O Bard balen 

Bar baleniler; balenie 



Bnrratiir 
Barra snrlea 
Borra sorto 
Borrainr 
O Bum tur 
Burra surfe 



The great Uog 

Of the great Hog 

To the great Hog 

The great Hog 

O great Hog 

from, with the great Hog 



Plural Number. 



Burresnre 
Burre surefta 
Burre mnko 
Burre sure 
O Burro suro 
Burro surete 



The great Hojn 

Of the grott Hogs 

To the great Hogs 

The great Hogi 

O groat Hogs 

firom, with the groat Hogp 



Hem A as L Those syllables which, in the dUique catesi aro printed in 
Italics» are the article. In the Gipsej« as well as in the bindostan 
language, the ardde is not placed beforo the noun, but affixed beheld 
it, and that is the sole indication of the case of a noun. In the Gipsey 
tongue, the article of the nominAtive case is o or i ; in the Hindostan» 
aor i 

Kim A RE II. The Gipscrjr knguage, as well as the Hlndostan, .has only 
two.gendersb the masculine and fennmne; Those nouns which end i^ t, 
aro, in both languages» feminine, wd all the rest masculme. Both 
languages change the masculine into the feminine gender, by putting 
a J* or an i for the termina^n. For "^^ff^j^t 



Oipsey, . Ri^a, the Prince» 
Hmdotitm, Ra|a« 



Ranj, the Princess 
Riyi 



Me 

Mrohi; Man. 
Mange; Man 
Manoe; Bias 
Manqer 



SonE Prokouns. 

1. I: Me; Itie, Mo, 

SiNGULAi Number. 



Me; Mo 


I 


Merra; Meika 


Of me 


Mmko 


Tome 


Mejko 


Me 


Mqse 


« ftomMe 



• ' 



Qipscy. 



Amtn; Men 
Amerohi 
Amenge; Men 
Amen; Men 
Amendar; Amense 



186 




iCndostBD. 


Englifl 


Plural Numb 


tin. 


Hamm 

Hummam; Hmnka 
Hummko 

Hummare ; Humko 
Hummse 


We 

Ofns 

Toils 

Vs 

from» with ITi 



Them: T«; To. 



SiNGUL^^'ft Number. 



Tu 

Trohi; Tute 
Tuke ; Tute 
Tutte ; Tut 
OTu 
Tutarhi; Tutec 



Tumen ; Tume . 
Tumarohi ; Turnende 
Tumengole ; Tumen 
Tumen; Tume 
O Tume 
1'i^mendar ; Tumense- 



Tu 




Thou 


Terra 




Of The* 


Tuko 




To Thee 


Tusko 




^ee 


OTu 




OThon 


Tnse 






from Thee 


Plura 


L NUMBBR. 


Turn 




You 


Tumana 




Of You 


Tumko 




To You 


Tnmane ; 


; Tnroko 


You 


OTum 




You 


Tumse 


• 


jfrom, with Yon 



3. a. He: Job; Uweh. 



Leste 
Las 



liester; Leha 



Singular Number. 



Uweh 
Jssika 
Jssiko 
Jssiko 
Jssise 



He 
Of Him 

To Him 

Him 

from, with Hin 



3. b. 



She : Joi ; Uwehi 



Singular Number. 



Joi 


Uwehi 


She 


Lati 


Uska 
Usko 


Of Her 


La 


To Her 


La 


Usko 


Her 


Later; Laha 


Uiise 


ürora, with Her 



187 



PLURA 

Jole 
Leute 

hen 

Lender 



MateuUne, 

Meri 

Alerige 

Menge 

OMiro 

Mender 



Maro 
Mari 

Marige 
Marise 
O Maro 
.Marider 



Matculine. 

Tiro 

Ten 

Tcrige 

Terige 

OTiro 

Tender 

Teriite 



Hindoftan. English. 

L Number, common to both Genders. 

Jnno "^^ 

Jnneka Of Them 

Jnneko To Them 

Jnne Them 

Jnnese from Them 



4. My: 



Femim'iie. 
Miri 



OMiri 



Miro-; 
Miri; 

Mateuline, 

Mem 
Merraka 
Merrako 
Merra 
O Merra 
'Merrase 



5. Oar: 



Maro; 
Man; 



Merra 
Merri 

Feminine, 

. Merri 
Merrika 
Merriko 
Merri 
O Merri 
Jjtferrse 

Hummarra 
Hommarri 



Mr 
Of My 
To My 
My 
OMy 
from My 



Singular Number. 



Miro 
Miro 
OMari 



Hummarra 

Hummarraka 

Hnmmarrako 

Hammarra 

O Hammarra 

Hummarrase. 



Hummarri Our 

Hummarrika Of Oar 

Hummarriko To Our 

Hummarri Our 

O Hummarri O Our 

Hummarrite firom Our 



rirt»; 
Tin; 



Terra 

Terri 



6. Thy: 

Singular Number. 



Feminine. 
liri 



OTiri 



Masculine, 

Terra 

Terraka 

Terrako 

terra 

O Terra 

Terrase 



Feminine, 

Tenri 

Terrika 

Terriko 

Tend 

OTeni 

Terrise 



O^Thy 
To Thy 

Thy 
OThy 
from« with Thy 



7. Your : Tumaro ; Tummarra 
Tumari ; Tummarri 

Singular Number. 



Tumaro Tomari 

Tumari 

Tumarige 

Tomarige 

O Tumaro O Tumari 

Tumarider; Tumarise 



Tummarra Tummarri 
Tummaraka Tummarrika 
Tummarrako Tummarriko 
Tummarra Tummarri 
O Tummarra O Tummarri 
Jummarrase Tummarrise 



Your 
Of Your 
To Your 
Your 
O Your 
from, with Your 



8. Who? Kohn? Cipsey; Kooh? HMostan. 



186 



Examples of the conjugation of both Languages. 

I am : Bie Horn ', Me Hej 

Present. — Singular Number. 



MtfidUine. 



Oipscy. 

xeinilllAC« 



Hindostaa. 
MtucuUfU, 



He Horn j Kom Sinjom He Hej ; Mem Ho ; Hota 
Tu Hal Sinjel Tj Hej ; Tern Hae ; Hota 

Job Hi Si Ywely Hej ; Wo Hae ; Hot« 



Hod 
Hod 
Hod 



English^ 



I am 

Thoaan 
Heia 



Plural Number, 



Hen Ham 
Tume Ham 
Jole Hi 



Sinjara Horn Hei ; Ham Haem ; Hote Hoda 
Sinjan Turn Hej ; Tom Ho ; Hote Hotia 
Siuja Jane Hei ; W-e Haem ; Hote Hotia 



We arc' 
Ye are 

They ar^ 



Imperfect.— ^Singular Number. 



He Hames 
Tu Hales 
Job Has 



Me Hua ; Mem Tha 
TuHoa; Tern Tha 
UwebHua; WohTh» 



Thi I was 
Thi Thon wast 
Thi He 



Plural Number. 



Hen Hamet 


Ham Hoe ; Ham The 


Thia 


We were 


Tome Harne» 


Turn Hue ; Tom The 


Thia 


Ye were 


Jole Hai 


IpneHue; We The 


Thia 


They were 



Me Sinjomahi 
Tu Sinjalahi 
job Sinja 



Perfect.!— Singular Number. 

Me Huatha 
Tu Huatha 
Uweh Huatha 



liiaTe been 
Vliou hast been 
lie hath tteea 



Men Sinjamahi 
Tume Siujanahi 
Jpie Sinje 



Plural Number. 

Hum Haathe 
Turn Huathe 
JnneHuathf 



Weharebeea 
Ye have been 
Tb^hsrelMieA 



1B7 
FoTUKB.— Smevi^K Nuicbbk. 



MeO«» 
DaCKidn 


Me Hi«» 
IWH»« 

Plubal Kukbbs. 


leWIW 
H««WIW 


UemOmüm 


JuieHi^ 

Infinitive. 


WealMiW 
YeeWIW 
Tli^alMibe 


• 


Hoft TV» be 





ToBuike; do: Kefje; Kwme. 

PeESBNT. — SlNOULAB NUMBEE. 

Me Kefd Me Kunto I wOe 

Ta Keroch Ta Kwitm TImm nikt» 

Job Kevd Uweh Kwitm He mtkelh 

Plubal Number. 

ScboKeriem HvmKiirrte Wennbe 

Tmnen Keijen Tum Kuirte Ye OMbe 

On Keide Jane Kniite Tbej BMbe 

ImPBBFBCT.— *SlNOULAlt NVMBBB. 

MeKeno« MeKorrtiÜia IdMaib« 

ToKerjel TuKontetba Thoudidtt aek« 

O Kerye Uweh Kurrtetba He did mabe 

Plubal Numbeb» 

Soho KerjoA Hum Knrrtetbe We did nabe 

Temen Kerjen Tun KurrUthe Ye did make 

Qn Keide Jnse Knrrtathe Tbey did mabe 

The comparison thus far will» it is presumed, be 
sufficient to convinci? 'every person of the truth 



190 

of the position, that the Gipsey language is really 
that of Hindostan. Let the reader look over the 
catalogue once more, and it will appear, on the 
average, that every third Gipsey word is likewise 
an Hindostan one ; or still more, out of thirty 
Gipsey words, eleven or twelve are constantly of 
Hindostan. This agreement is uncommonly great; 
it must at the same time be remembered, that the 
words above communicated have been learned from 
the Gipseys within a few years; consequently, at 
a time when they had been nearly four complete 
centuries away from Hindostan, their native coun- 
try (as we may now assert it to be), arhong people 
who spoke languages totally different, and in 
which the Gipseys themselves conversed. Under 
the constant, and so long continued, influx of these 
languages, their own must necessarily have suffer- 
ed great alteration ; more especially as they are a 
people entirely ignorant, without either writing or 
literature. One foreign word after another must 
have crept into their language ; consequently, by 
the frequent use of such words, the Gipsey word 
of the same signification was more rarely used, 
and by degrees lost from their recollection : by 
which circumstance the origijial composition of 
their language became completely deranged*; which 
is the reason why, as any' person may convince 

* For a comparison of the Gipsey language at different periods, 
see ^A), «Appendix. . 



himself by inspection, various languages and idioms 
—Turkish, Grecian, Latin, Wallaehian, Hun- 
garian, Sclavonian, German, and others — make 
part of the foregoing vocabulary. The word romey 
mauy is Coptic; with, perhaps, a few more. It 
does not appear that there is so much Persian in 
the Gipsey language, as has been generally ima- 
gined ; and even what there is of it they may 
have brought with them from their native country, 
as many Persian words are current in Hindostan. 

After all these reflections, we ought rather to 
wonder that the number of Hindostan words in 
the Gipsey language is so considerable, than to 
require it should be greater, in order to furnish 
sufficient proof of the Hindostan language ' being 
the Gipseys' mother tongue. 

But we have a right, from the agreement 
which appears in the catalogue published, to con- 
clude the affinity is nmch more intimate. The 
idea hitherto adopted has been that, among the 
Gipsey words quoted, all those of the Hindostan 
language, answering to tlie annexed meaning, 
appear, which are still extant in the Gipsey 
language. But this is certainly by no means the 
case» It will be recollected, from the first part, 
how great a secret the Gipseys. make of their 
language, and how suspicious they appear when 
any person wishes to learn a few words of it. 
Even if the Gipsey is not perverse, he is very 



190 

inattentive ; and Is consequently likely to answer 
some other rather than the true Gipsey word. 
Under such circumstances, it is very possible, nay 
even probable, that in the foregoing catalogue 
there may many words be inserted, for which 
true Gipsey, of course Hindostan, words might 
be found ; but that the Gipseys when enquired 
of, either from levity or by deisign, did not declare 
them. 

Further, it is not all absurd to pronounce, that 
there remain more, or at least different, true 
Gipsey words among those residing in one country 
than another. And if, at a future period, some 
person should, as an experiment on the above 
catalogue, examine a second or third time parties 
of Gipseys in different countries, and compare the 
words obtained with those already delivered, the 
catalogue would certainly receive a considerable 
augmentation in favour of our hypothesis. 

Finally, we must consider the Hindostan lan- 
guage itself. This, it is true, is fundamentally 
the same all over Hindostan ; but, like every other 
language in the world, has different dialects in the 
various provinces. The eastern dialect, spoken 
about the Ganges, has different names for some 
things, and different inflexions of some words, 
from the western one spoken about the Indus. 
There is, besides, a third, varying from both these, 
viz. the Surat dialect, which has a number of 



191 

Malabar and other words mixed with it. To this 
must be added, that in the Hindostan, as well fts 
in every other language, there are often several 
names for the same thing. The particular dialect 
bearing the closest affinity to the Gipsey lan- 
guage, as will appear hereafter, is the western, 
and perhaps more especially that of Surat. Had 
this therefore, or the western one in general, been 
the standard of the above comparison; and had 
we not, for want of words in these dialects, been 
obliged frequently to have recourse to the eastern 
one, spoken in Bengal; or had we, even in the 
latter, been able to obtain so many words, that 
where the Gipsey, from not knowing any 
more, could only give us a single expression, 
- we might have produced, not one or two as at 
present, but all, or at least the greater part, of 
the synonymous appellations : we should infallibly 
in this manner recover, in the Hindostan language, 
many a Gipsey word, which even the learned are 
unable to derive from the European or any other 

4 I 

language, and yet have as little appearance of being 
Hindostan. With respect to the construction 
and inflexions of the two languages, they are 
, evidently the same. That of Hindostan has only 
two genders; the Gipsey the same. In the former 
every word ended in j is feminine, all the rest 
masculine ; in the latter the same rule is observed. 
That makes the inflections entirelv bv the article^ 



194 

adding it at the end of the word; the Gipsej 
language proceeds exactly in the same manner. 
Finally, likewise, bating a trifling variation, this 
identical similarity is evident in the pronouns. 

So much for the language of the Gipseys. As 
this is indubitably Hindostan, it would be suffi- 
cient of itself to prove the descent of those people 
from Hindostan. But we shall now proceed to 
other grounds, which, united with the proofs from 
the language, will leave us less reason to doubt 
concerning this matter. 

That the Gipseys, and natives of Hindostan, 
resemble each other in complexion and shape, 
and are equally timorous and cowardly, is undeni- 
aole. But we shall pass over these, together with 
some other circumstances; as, perhaps, neither 
the one nor the other are such ' distinguishing 
marks as not to be met with among other Oriental 
people. 

The name of Polgar, likewise, carries some 
weight with it, which we find among the Gipseys 
in the earliest times, before they began to change 
the names they brought with them for those used 
in Europe. Polgar, as we may remember, was the 
name of the leader who, in the year 1496, ob- 
tained a safe-conduct from the Hungarian king 
Uladislaus II. by virtue of which he, with his 
horde, consisting of twenty-five tents or families, 
had the liberty of travelling about where he pleased. 



195 

This name Polgar originq^s in India, \yhere it is 
the appellation of a deity presiding over marriages 
and matrimonial concerns : the' Indians are very 
fond of bearing this name, as well as the names 
of their other deities. 

In reciting the employments of the Gipseys, 
their smith's business was mentioned; wlien it 
was remarked, that their anvil is a stone, and 
what more implements they use consist in a pair of 
hand-bellows, a pair of tongs, a hammer, a vise, 
and. a file. With such a portable apparatus, the 
travelling Gipsey wanders from place to place. 
We will compare this account with what Sonnerat 
relates of the Indian smiths: the foUowins: arc 
his own words : ." The smith carries his tools,, his 
" shop, and his forge, about with him, and works 
" in any place where he can find employment: he 
" erects his shop before the house of his employer, 
•* raising a low wall with beaten earth, before 
" which he places his hearth ; behind this wall he \ 
*^ fixes two leathern bellows, which, his apprentice 
" blows alternately, to ,keep up the fire. He has 
•' a stone instead of an anvil, and his whole appa* 
" ratus is a pair of tongs, a hammer, a beetle, 
" and a file." The most striking circumstance 
relating to this coincidence is, that both Gipsey 
and Indian should use the same ,kind of hand- 
bellows, and both have exactly two. As the 

P 



aipprentic6 works these iff the Indian, so does the 
wife or one of the children for the Gipsey. 

What is asserted of the young Gipsey girls^ 
tambling about with their jiathers who are musi^ 
cians, dancing with all kinds of indecent and lascivi- 
ous attitudes and gestures, to divert any person 
who is willing to give them a small gratuity for 
so acting, is likewise perfectly Indian. Sonnerat 
confirms this also. — " Surat is,** he says, " famous 
" for its dancing girls. ^ These young women 
" devote themselves entirely to the worship of the 
^ Gods, whom they attend in the proMssions, 
*^ dancing and singing before the representations 
^ of them. The handycraftsmen generally destine 
** the youngest of their daughters to this service^ 
** and send them to the pagoda before they comt 
^* to the age of puberty. There they ha^e dancing 
*^ and. music masters, with persons to teach them 
^^ to sing. The Bramins form their young mind^ 
^' and deflower them ; in the end, they becotne 
** common prostiaites. They then join in com- 
^* panics, take musicians with them^ to enteirtain 
" any-body who chooses to engage them,, with 
*^ music and dancing." Sonnerat speaks here like- 
. wise of the wanton gestures of these dancing girl^, 
of which he has given a* drawing ; and ends b^ 
description thus : " The blinking of their eyes— n 
*' half open, half shut — ^and the negligent sinkr 



1$^ 

*Mttg of their bbdie^ to th« most lirfgdishlrig 
" music, she\tr tlmt their whdlfe ftä** breätllteÄ 
" nothing but lasciviousness,'* 

Fortune-telling is practised alt ovef th# «ärft j tut 
the peculiar kitid profe^^d by thft Gipsers, viz, 
chiroffianc^'-^totistäiitly referrfng to l<rh^ther the 
parties shall be rich or |KK)r, fortilttat€ c* utthappy 
in marriage; whether they shall hav* ihäny of 
few children, &c. — b no-where öiet With but iü 
India. The following instance will cvinöe, hö^^ 
perfectly öipsey ish it is : " It once happened,** 
says Baldafeus, " that the Rajah Khafis ölädfe his 
" appearance before the inhabitants j when being 
" given to understaöd that an experienced Btamiti 
" was arrived, he ordered him to be brought before 
^* him, and said— ^* Narret (that was hi* name), 
*' look at itiy daughter^» hand, and itifomi me 
^'whether she will be happy or unfor>tunatej poof 
** or rich; whether she will have many or few 
*' children ; if her life Will be long of short : speak 
**öut freely, and conc^l nothing/ The Bramin 
" having looked at her hand, replied, * May it 
" please yoiif Majesty, äGCordin^ to the indicatiptt . 
" of these lines, I read thtis-^Shfe shall bear seven 
^^ children, v!2. six sons and a daughter; the 
*^ youngest of whom Aall iiot only deprive you 
"of your crown and empire, but likewise of your 
*' head and life, and aftttrWards place himMlf ift 



198 

^^your seat/" This method/ Baldaeus adds, of 
looking in the hands, is very common among the 
heathens. 

The excessive loquacity of the Gipseys, as well 
as their very advantageous natural qualities, which 
have been before noticed, are likewise distinguish- 
ing characteristics of the Indian; besides, the 
very name Zigeuner, or, according to a broader 
way of pronunciation, Ciganen and Tchiiigenen, 
is the appellation of an Indian people, living at the 
mouth of the Indus, as mentioned by Thevenot 

Another striking intimation of tne Indian .de- 
scent of the Gipsey», is the partiality of the latter 
for red colours, or saffron: in like manner the 
Bramin performs all his religious duties in a white 
dress, without the least mixture of any other co- 
lour. On his return home from these functionsj^ 
he changes his white turban for a red one. The 
common Indians also prefer this colour for their 
little round caps: and these last, especially on 
holidays, make a double deep yellow stripe on their 
forelieads with fat, saffron, and sacred cow-dung. 
The Bramins make the same stripe with redy as 
a mark of pre-eminence. Again, the Gipseys as 
Twiss assures us of those in Spain, never inter- 
marry with any people who are not, like themselves, 
of Gipsey extraction; which puts us strongly 
in mind of the Indiaü castes. 



199 



CHAPTER VI. 

The Gipseys are of the Caste called Suders. 

We come now to the position we hoped to sub^ 
stantiate, viz. that the Gipseys are of the lovi^est 
class of Indians, namely, Parias; or, as they are 
called in Hindostan, Suders. 

The whole great nation of Indians is known to 
be divided into four ranks or stocks, which are 
called by a Portuguese nanie, castes, each of which 
has its own particular subdivisions. Of these 
castes, the Bramin is the firsts the second con- 
tains the Tschechteries OT Setreas: the third con- 
sists of the Beis or fVasziers: the fourth is the 
caste of the just-mentioned Sliders ; who upon the 
^Peninsula of Malabar, where, their condition is 
the same as in Hindostan, are called P^m* or 
Parier. * 

Tlie relative situation of these four castes, and 
the grounds of their difference, rest on ^he Indian 
fable of the Creation. This relates, that the God 
who created Bruma, ordained that the Bramin 
should proceed out of Brüma's mouth ; the Tschech- 
terie out of his arms ; the Beis out of his legs ; and 
the Sudor from his feet. As Bruma afterwards 
^iUotted the employments of each of these stocks^ 



be appointed the first to seek after knowledge, 
to give instruction, and to take care of religion; 
the second was to serve in war ; the third was, as 
well as the Bramin, to cultivate science, but to 
attend particularly to the breeding of cattle and 
agriculture: the caste of Suders was destined to 
be surbsfrvient ta the Bramins, the Tschechteries, 
jia4 the Beis. The^ Suders are held in the great* 
ffst €09,1;enitpt : they are considered infamous and 
unclean, from their occupations; anä they are 
Ikbhorred b^c^use they eat flesh, the three other 
castes living entirely on vegetables. 

Of this very caste, as will appear by the follow* 
ing Qoroparis'on, our Gipseys are composed 

We have seen that the iGipseys arc in the 
highest degree filthy, and disgusting; and with 
le^rd to character, of the most depraved hearts : 
t^t they ar« thievish, liars, and fraudulent to 
ei^cess :*r;-rand these are exactly the qualities pf the 
Suders. Bald^us says, ^^ The Fareas are a filthy 
^* race, in a word, a contemptible stinking people ; 
^* a wicked crew, who in winter steal much cattle, 
^ kill them, and sell the hides.'' Jt is again te-r 
lilted in th^Daiii^ Mission Intelligence, ^^ Nobody 
^can deqy that the Bareier are th|^ dregs and 
** refuse of «U the Indians; they have wicked dia^ 
^* positic^», are thievish, arrant liars, are intractably 
^ with ^(ood usagCj require to be kept in order by 

^^§g9t an4 blows, and h^ld ^9d^ <x)ntiQual r^ 



ii 



* straijttt." Moreover, Neuhof assure» us, " The 
Parruas arc^fuU of every kind of dishonesty; 
they do not consider lying and cheating to be 
sinful, as they have no other maxim or custom 
** among them." The Gipsey's solicitude to oon^ 
ceal his language, is likewise a striking Indian 
trait. " Custom,'' says Pallas, of the Indians 
round Astrakan, " has rendered them to the 
^^ greatest degree suspicious about their language» 
^^ insomuch that I never was able to obtain a small 
^' vocabulary from them.'' 

In addition to the foregoing, the Gipseys love 
to intoxicate themselves : they* are particularly fond 
of brandy, because it more speedily answers their 
purpose than any other liquor. Among the Suders 
we find this incKnation is universal ; though other 
Indians do not commit such excess, or very seldom^ 
and then privately. 

What has been further said with respect to tht 
immoral life of the Gipseys, agrees perfectly 'with 
the Suders* " Their wives and daughters," says 
Neuhof, " make no difficulty of yielding up their 
" persons, for money, to any sort of people, be 
" they of what country or religion soever j^ as the 
*' inclination of this tribe tends more to vohiptu- 
•' ousness, than towards diligence or indui^try.^ 

With regard to Gipsey marriages, it has 'l)eea 
asserted, that it is a matter of indifference to them 
whether tlie party he the nearest relation or an 



202 

( 
/ 

utter stranger; or, as Salmon expresses himself, 
the nearest relations cohabit like b#asts with each 
other; and as to education, that their children 
grow up in the most shameful neglect, without 
either discipline or instruction. All this is pre- 
cisely the case with the Pariars. In the Journals 
of the Missionaries already quoted, it is said, 
" With respect ^to matrimony, they act like the 
" beasts; and their children are brought up without 
" restraint or information." 

Gipseys are fond of being about horses ; so are 
the Suders in India, for which reason they 
are commonly employed as horsekeepefs by the 
Europeans resident in that country, . 

The Gipseys were formerly employed as flayers, 
hangmen, and executioners, all over Hungary and 
Transylvania; and they still readily perform those 
offices whenever called upon. In like manner, in 
India, no one who is not of the caste of Suders 
will on any account transact that kind of business. 
We have seen that the Gipseys hunt after 
cattle which have died of distempers, in order to 
feed on them ; and where they can provide more 
of the flesh than is sufficient for one day's con-' 
sumption, dry it in the sun: such is likewise a 
constant custom with the Pariars in India. " It 
^ is their office,'' according to the accounts we 
have of them, " to remove carrion, which they cut 
^* up ; part they boil fresh and eat, other part^ 



SOS 

*' they dry in pieces, by the heat of the sun, for 
^^ their future provision." 

Hitherto the accounts of the Gipseys and Suders 
perfectly coincide. Even the before-mentioned 
smiths and dancing girls are of this caste: and 
as they before shewed, in general, from the simi- 
larity of their make, that they were of Indian 
extraction, so in this instance they giv^e parti- 
cular evidence, that they are descendants from the 
lowest class. 

But there are still some further traits relating to 
the Gipseys ; we shall now examine whether they 
also are to be found among the Suders. • Of these 
the first is, that the Gipseys always choose their 
place of residence near some village or city; very 
seldom within the village or city, even though 
there may be no order to prevent it : as is the case 
in Moldavia, Wallachia, and all parts of Turkey. 
'Even the more improved Gipseys, as those in 
Transylvania, who have long since discontinued 
their wandering mode of life, and might, with per- 
mission from government, reside within the cities, 
yet rather choose to build their huts in some bye- 
place, without their limits. This custom seemi 
to be a remnant of their original Suder education ; 
it being usual, all over India, for the Suders to 
have their huts, without the villages of the other 
castes, and in retired places near their cities. 

JFurtl^er, with regard to the Gipseys' religion, 



■i* 



\. 



^04 

^c m^y itcoilecti from what has been sud, that 
then' sense of it is very coafined, and that they 
fkSLVi^ nQt the least degree of steadiness i& it To 
l^e Gipseys, every persuasion is the same; as 
^ften as he meets with a different one, he changes 
]^is opinions. To-day he receives the sacramenJt 
^ a Lutheran; next Sunday, from a Roman- 
catholic ; and perhaps before the end of the week 
partakes of the communion in a Reformed church. 
Yet the greater part of them do not even go so far * 
g$ this, but live without any religion at all, and 
are, as ToUius says, worse than lieathiens. The 
ipaoue wonderful such an appearance isrr-of -a Whole 
people being so void of and indiiferent about re- 
ligion — the more weight it carries with it to con- 
^m their Indian origin, when all this is found to 
be literally true pf tloe Suders. " Thiß race," says 
Bogerius, of the Suders in the kingdom of Surat, 
•* seems to be neither heathens nor Mahometans; 
^* tliey live on in their own way, without any 
" religion, or worshipping of God. There arc 
**some, it is true, who imitate the other caster 
♦* in an outward shew of religion, and appoint 
■ * priests for themselves ; but they neither frequent 
^* the pagodas of the higher castes, nor have, any 
♦* of tlieir own : and as to the choice of their deities, 
^* every one conforms to the custom of the plaqe 
^* where he lives, or happens to remain ^ s^oi^. 
,^* tjipie, exactly the same as the Gipsey»,'^ 



^9S 

If fteople, in reacting on the emigr^ücm of the 
Qipseys, arc not determined to imagine that they 
were actu^^ted by a blih^ impulse, tQ break up 9^, 
onfCy and quit their native country; no c^useica^ 
be assigned for their retreat from thence so p^a^i^ 
^ible as the war <^ Timur 3eg in India. The date 
of their arrivial marks it very plainly. It was in 
the years 14Ö8 aiid HO9 that this conqueror t^ 
vaged India; and h^viug persuaded himseU, a$ 
well as his followers, that he had undertaken the 
expedition against India for the purpose of dw* 
geminating the Mahometan religion^ . his war was 
oppressive enough to occasion such a;n emigration. 
Not only every one whb made any resistance Wto 
destroyed, and such as fell into the enemy a Ijiafuds^ 
though quite defencelesi^, were made slav^ but 
in a short time these very islaves, to the ^u^ber 
of a hundred thousand, were .put to death« As 
in consequence an universe} panic took piace^ 
nobody being secure that it might not he h^ ow^ 
fate in a short ti^e, what could be more natural 
than that a great number of terrified inhabitants 
should endeavour to save themselves by flight? 

An objection naturally occurs, that when this 
supposed flight tpok plaqe^ had' it t>een true, not 
Gipseys only, pr the lowest class (^people, )t)ut 
with them au j^prts of Indian^ oi superior rank, 
would have come anxong us. Bujt this argument 



2Ö6 

possession which the three higher castes of Indians 
'entertain for their country. They ascribe an ex- 
traordinary degree of holiness to it, and believe it 
to be the only country thought, by the Cre^^or 
of the universe, worthy for such sanctified people 
as the Bramins, Tschechteries, and Beis, to dwell 
in. They would rather suffer torture and death, 
than quit this land, chosen by*he Almighty him- 
self for their residence, to go and dwell any-where 
else. Moreover a Suder is, in their estimation, 
the most execrable being in the world; and the 
least intercourse with him would be defiling and 
degrading their high characters, which, to them, 
would be more dreadful than death. Wherefore 
it was a moral impossibility for those of a higher 
caste to have any thing in common with a Suder, 
or that thev should have made an united retreat. 
Finally, by putting themselves into the power of 
the Suders, with whom thev live constantlv in a 
state of discord and inveteracy, they would have 
hazarded a greater danger, than by patiently risk- 
ing their fate from the hands of their common 
enemy. If any of the higher ranks of Indians 
did withdraw themselves, on account of the trou- 
bles, it is probable they retired southwards, to 
people of their own sort, the Mahrattas. 

As ever}' part to the northward and eastward 
was beset by the enemy, and no passage lefl 
in those directions for escaping it seems most pro* 



t 



807 

bable that the countries belo^ir Multan, to the 
mouth of the ladus, were the iirst asyhim and 
rendezvous of the fugitive Suders. Here they 
were safe; and so remained, till Timur i^turned 
from his victories on the Ganges* Tlien it was 
that they first entirely quitted the country ; andi 
probably, with them a considerable number of 
the proper inhabitants about the Indus, which will 
explain the meaning of their original name, Ci» 
ganen, or, according to the German mode of speak- 
ing, Zigeuner. For if it was in the country of 
the Zinganen that these terrified fugitives collected, 
and they afterwards drew a considerable numhcr 
of the Zinganen themselves along with them, 
nothing could be more easy or natural than that 
the people who had assembled ft-om the general 
wreck should take the name of the greater 
number. 

By what route they came to us, cannot be 
ascertained : if they went straight through the 
southern Persian deserts of Sigistan, Makran, and 
Kirman, along the Persian Gulph to the mouth 
of the Euphrates, thence they might get, by 
Bassora, into the great deserts of Arabia, after- 
wards into Arabia Petraja, and so arrive in Kgypt, 
by the isthmus of Suez. They must certainly 
have been in Egypt before they reached us ; 
otherwise we cannot account for the report that 
they were Egyptians. In what manner they 



£08 

were aflferwardi transported to Eutöpe m Hso an 
Miscure research : perhaps it Mras dSected by meairt 
•f the Turks, who, being at that time fully ttä^ 
pkjfyed with the Greckn empife, might penäit the 
Gripse}^ to travel about with the fabble of Serden- 
jest) and Nepfaers, who were appointed fo go oh 
iava^ng parties. However^ all that can be said 
«pon that subject is mere surmise.. The chief aim 
in this Dissertation was, to prove that the Gipseyä 
eame froip Hindostan, and that they were Sudets, 
which it is hoped has been accomplished. When 
every thing, even the most fortuitous concomitant 
circumstances, but particularly that moM deci*^ 
nve one — the similarity of their language to that 
of Hindostan, uniformly point out that extrac- 
tion, we cannot believe them to belong to a dif- 
ferent ooantry, and to be descended fttm another 
people. 



SUPPLEMENT..^ 

t 

To invalidate, if possible, the charge 'of cänmbalism-— 
apparently so well bounded — broüsnt arainst the Gip- 
sey tribe, it is thought proper in tnis place to mentioa 
circumstances, relative to the proceedings in Hungiurj, 
which at least render the justice of' the sentence pro* 
nounced against these devoted people doubtful. 

In the year 1534, as recorded in the Hungarian histonr, 
the Gipsevs were suspected of traitorously assisting John 
Zapolya ; m consequence of which the governor of Leuts« 
chau, Tsernaboy sent some horsemen to arrest a company 
of them, near Iglo : the greatest part escaped by flight; 
only a few old men and boys were taken, who were 
brought into Leutschau. These confessed circun)stantiallj 
(which certainly appears improbable, that men should I^ 
to effect their own ruin), as well before, a% upoioi the 
rack, the following falsities — ^That a hundred of them 
had been sent by Zapolya since the middle of Lent, and 
had agreed for a sum of money to set fire to the five 
chief cities, Kaschau, Leutschan, Bartfeld, Bpfriesy 
and Zeben : that the preceding Saturday several ot theat 
had privately entered Leutschau, disguised like Walla-. 
/;hians and snepherds,'under the pretence of selling skins : 
that they laid fire in various places ; and moreover, that 
they had murdered several people : and finally, that thej 
had letters from Zapolya to thirteen different cities, witni 
•rders to afford them shelter and protection within their 
districts, as long as they chose to remain. In conse- 
quence of this confession they were impaled, " but 
" whether justly or not," adds the Chronicle, " that, let 
•' him answer for who condemned them :^ for on being 
conducted about the town, to shew in what places they 
had laid the fire, they could not specify them ; besides^ 
they denied every thing when they came to execution. 

fixcept the circumstance of retracting, of which no- 
thing is mentioned in the sentence of death, the above 
case seems to be exactly similar to that of the men-eaters 
executed in Hungary in 1782. These were taken upon 
suspicion of theft; in the course of their examination 
something escaped them which gave occasion to think 



f •■ 



210 

they had committed murder, and the criminals being in- 
terrogated on this point, perhaps on account of the se* 
▼erity used, or probably from an idea of h^oism (a very 
common trait in their character), they confessed the 
&ct, and chattered awpy till they had nlled the paper, 
without considering' consequence*. When desired to 
state where they had deposited the bodies, they promised 
to shew, but on being brought to the spot nothing was 
found, and they endeavoured to run off. Nevertheless, 
having once confessed, they were put on the rack. As 
ihe persons said to have been murdered could not be 
found, the judge imagined they must have eaten them, 
which, though denied by the poor miserable wretches, 
decided their fate. 

(A) 

How much the GipMj language has altered by time, may be seen, io a 
ttrildn^ manner» from the following translations of the Lord*s Pxyyer, obtained 
from Hungarian Gipseys at diderent periods. 

1. Lord's Prayer, according to the old translatiaii. 

Bade! gula dela dicha mengi, Czaoreng hogodoleden tavel, ogolede* 

hogoladhem» te a felpesz, trogolo anao Czarchode, ta Tela mcngi sztre kedapu» 

maro m%xidro kata agjcsz igiertiszara a more beszecha, onie dsame, andro vo 

.lyata, enUala megula, dela enchala zimata. Se^zkesz kisztrio oo^em banisztri, 

(u^yere leriszamiirme, ä häaa, andre Tecsi, ale Va kosz. Piho» 

2. The same» according to a more modem translation. 

Muro Dad, kolim andro therosz ; Ta weltro szentanao ; Ta weltro fhim X 
Ta weltri olya, szarthin andro therosz kethjn tlie pre pTiu: sze kogyesz damande 
aandro agyesz a mingi ; Ertitza amare besecha, szar, f faamin te ertingiszama 
tebezecha ; Mali ssa man andre bezna, nicka men le dsongalin mans^^r, Ke 
iSxivo f hin, tiro hino baribo szekovari. Amen. 

3. Another, with the Latin. 

Amaro del Szavo hal oth^ opre 6ndro cs^r^z avel szinton tro nar» 
Noster Deus qui es ibi super in coelo, Teniat sanctum tuum nomen, 

te avel tri lume te khergyol tri voje szar andro cs£r6sz chide 
nt Tcniat tuum regnum ut fiat tua voluntas sicut in coelo «cque 

te ph6 phu. kmkro mandro ogy^uszuno d6 &meng6 S^'^sz ^rtin6 
yJt in terra, nostrum paiiem quotidianum da nobis liodie, femitte 

amcnge km&To vitsigosz t(* &m6n kid6 4rtin&ha &m&r6ng^, palidschi 
nobLi nostrum peccatum ut nos ita remittimus nostris, ne inducas 

lim^n ^ndro dschungalo tsaszosz, t&mi unk^T 4men drri &ndral 6 
nos in periculosam horam, sed sume not ex e 

dMchunsralo tiri hin € lume tiri hin ezor te akana-szekc\'ar. 
pcriculo tuum est regnum tua est potentia, ut nunc «semper. 



Amen. 



FINIS. 



BallintiKe, Typ. Pufcwt. AdtlphL 




\ 



k^^^^^H 



