Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



J 



i=,GoogIf 



IIS 



=,GoogIf 



:,.;,l,z.d=,G00gIf 



=,GoogIf 



:,.;,l,z.d=,G00gIf 



DISSERTATION 

ON THE I H 2. ^ ' ' 

G I P S E Y S: 



MJWVER OP UTS, SICKIfSSS, DEATH, i BUHIAL, 

FAMILY ECOKOXY. RELjqiON. 

OCCUPATIONS i TRADES. LASOVAGt. 
SURRIAOESiEDUCATIOS, SCiENCES ^ ARTS. j«. fe. ie. 



AN HISTORICAL ENQUIRY 



ORIGIN 4- FIRST APPEARANCE IN EUROPE. 



PKOM THE GEBHAN OP 

H. M. G. GRELLMANN. 



PBINTED BT WILLIAM BALLINTIWB« 

.Doic-Mrtrt, Add^ Strand! 

SOLD BY EFFDiGHAM WILSON, ' 

eVPOSlTE TH* CBAPTKR COFPBE-HOUSE, AT. PAVl's. 



1807. 



_,;, z,;i .Cookie 



J,.:,z,;i:,C00glc" 



ADVERTISEMENT. 

The following Dissertation has already ap- 
peared in an English dress, having been; 
some years since, translated by the late 
M.Raper, Esq. F.R.S. and A.S. for the pur- 
pose, as he states in his preface, of affording 
" such of his countrymen as were unacquainted 
'" with the German language an opportunity 
" of learning from what part of the world it is 
" probable the Gipseys came among us." 
The original work, and Mr. Raper's translation, 
are burtheijed with many notes— Greek, Latin, 
French, German, English — shewing the sources 
whence the information was derived, most of 
which, for obvious reasons, are omitted in 
the present edition; such only being retained 
as were thought indispensable, or particularly . 
interesting. 

Jvlt/, 1807. 



i:,C00glc 



i:,C00glc 



CONTEWTSi 



Intbodüction 



SECTION THE FIRST. 



DESCRIFnON or THE OIFSEYS... THEIR MAIJIKE^ 'OF UF^ 



CHAFTBB I. 

- . . ',..,,,■. J^t, 

VartQut Appellatiom of thete People . ^ . . . , 1 

CHAFTBB It. 

On tkt DUpertion of the Gip$tys, and their Num- 

benin I^irope >, . . vi.., ...... 9 

, CBAPTK« in. 
The Prt^iiet of their Bodies 10 

CHAPTBB IV. 

On their Food dnd Beverage . .. ., 15 

On the Dreu of the GijM^f, . . . , . . ., , 8ä 



., ,.;1 .Cookie 



CONTENTS. 

CHAPTEE VI. 

On the Family Ecml>rhi/'iifflf£'(^>sejis,. . . ^ . 31 

CHAPTER VII. 

Their Occupatiom and Trades SS >f 



CHAPTER VIII 

On thär Marriagei and Education 



CHAPTER IX. 

On their Sicknets, Death, and Burial ,. . . . . 68 

CHAPTER X. 

Political Reguieftioiu^peatUiir (« tke.Gip^ap . ... 72 
CHAPTER XI, 

O» the 'Relipon of the Gipseys . . , .„ . .. - 79 



CHAPTER Xll. 

Thär Language, Sciences, and Arts 



CHAPTER XI11 



Character and Cupacitiei <^ Mje. Qipsetfi; whether ^^ 
they are an Advantage or a Detriment to States^ 89 

CHAPTER XIV. 

Concerning the Toleration of the Gipseys by the.dif' 
' ' fereitt States 'of' Europe ....... \ 93 

CHAFTETI XV. 

Eftay onthe Improvement of the Gipseys . . .' . 103 



., ,z,;i:,G00glc 



C O N T E N TS, 
SECTION THE SECOND. 

ON THE ORIGIN OP THE GIFSEY3. 

CHAPTER I. 
Thtfint Apftarance of Gtpiegt in Europe .... 109 

CRAPTER II. 

On the Sanctity, Passports, and Difference of the for- 
mer from the latter Gipseys : 117 

CHAPTER III. 

Presumed Origin of the Gipseys 197 

CHAPTER IV. 

Ort. the Egj/ptian Descent of the Gipseys .... 14? 

CHAPTER V. 

The Giptof* come from Hindostan 170 

CHAFTEB VI. 

The Gips^ are of the Caste called Suders ... 199 



Supplement 



L, ,z,;i.,C00gIC 



_,;, z,;i:,C00glc 



lNTR0DUCT10>f. 



1 HE Gipseys are a singular phenomenon in Europe; 
whether we contemplate their habitations, atieud 
at their meals, or merely look in theij faces, they 
always appear particular, and we are each moment 
Struck with something new and extraonlinary. 
- What appears most worthy of remark is, that 
neither time, climate, nor example, has, in gene- 
ral, hitherto, made any alteration. For the space , 
of between three and four hundred years, they have 
gone wandering about, like pilgrims and strangers: 
they are found in eastern and western cguntiies, 
as well among the rude as civilised, the indo- 
lent as active, people : yet they remain ever, and 
in all places, what their fathers were — Gipseys. • 
Africa makes them no blacker, nor Europe whiitr: 
they neither learn to be lazy in Spain, nor diligent 
in Germany: in Turkey, Mahomet^ and among 
Christians, Christ, remain equally without adora^ 
tion. Around, on every side, they see fixed dwell- 
ings, with settled inhabitants ; they, nevertheless, ■ 
proceed in their own way, and continue, for the ' 
most part, unsocial wandering robbers^ 

When we search for similar cases, among all the 
ditFerent people who have quitted their mother . 



.Cookie 



country; anel inhabited a foreign one, wc do not 
meet with a single instance that exactly agrees 
with that of the Gipseys. History certainly does re- 
Cord accounts of people that have migrated, and 
remained the same in a strange country ; but then 
this constancy has been on account of religion, 
either permitted by the regents, or maintainedby 
their victorious arms : though this last circumstance 
has existed much less frequently than might be 
imagined. Many instances have occurred in which, 
the people subdued being more enlightened than 
their conquerors, the latter have adopted ' tlie 
1 manners of the former. The Romans became Greek» 
on the conquest of Greece ; and the Franks as- 
sumed the manners of the Gauls when in possession 
of their country: the Mantcheous vanquished the 
Chinese ; but Chinese customs prevailed over those 
of the Mantcheous. How, then, does it happen 
that the Gipseys, who never either established their 
I manners and customs by force, or obtained any 
toleration from governments under which they 
lived, remain unchanged, and resemble each other . 
exactly, in every place ? There are two causes, to 
which this coincidence is principally owing: one is 
tbe place whence they originate, with their conse- 
quent mode of thinking ; the other arises from' the 
circumstances which have hitherto attended their 
situation. 
\ The Gipseyi are unquestionably of ^tem origin, 



i.vCoogIc 



and have eastern notions. Tliere iff a principle in* 
bereDt in uncivilised people, particularly those of 
Oriental countries, which occasions them to be 
strongly attached to their own habits : hence 
every custom, every conception, which has once 
been current among them, be it ever so pernicious 
or ridiculous, is invariably preserved ; or any affec" 
tion which has once predominated in their minds, 
retains its dominion even for ages. Innovations do 
not easily succeed with people living in a state bor- 
dering on that of nature ; the least deviation froni 
custom is observed, and often resented with impC'' 
tuosity. For any new thing to talce root it must i 
; either be introduced by cunning and force, or be 
.^attended with the most favourable circumstances. 
"This latter was the case with Christiani^. Provid- 
ence had called Greeks and Romans into the eas^ 
and, by innumerable vicissitudes, had rendered that 
country ripe for fiirther instruction : then came the 
great Sower — Christ scattered the seed, and it 
prospered. Mahomet, on the contrary, before hte 
became strong enough to enforce conviction witfa 
the sword, brought about his purpose by art: 
knowing that the weak side of his countrymen 
Vas their veneration for every thing handed down 
JTom their forefathers, he gave his new reli^on the 
colouring of antiquity. 

Mahomet says, " We have swerved tiom th« 
" reh^on of our founder Abraham, and have in- 
b2 



" traduced novelties among us. Abraham wot' 
** shipped only one God ; we have many Gods. 
" I am sent to retrench these novelties, and to 
"bring you back to the religion of your fore* 
" fathers." This was the first ground on which 
he went, ^hen the Ishmaelite would not ac- 
quiesce in the charge of having ^llen off from 
Abraham's religion, Mahomet proceeded : " Yc 
'' are illiterate people ; ye have no books : the 
" inhabitants of the neighbouring countries have 
" books, which contain the religion of Abraham." 
The Arabians applied to the Jews and Christians, 
for information on this head; and as the event 
turned in favour of the pretended prophet, they - 
yielded without contradiction. Mahombt pro- 
ceeded in teaching, and again appealed to the 
people with books: the Arabians, too, continued 
asking questions, being more tractable whenever 
his assertions were confirmed ; but when the con- 
trary happened, a dispute arose, in which the 
prophet could only get the better by defending 
the antiquity of his madness at the expence of 
truth, accusing both the Jews and Christians with 
having falsified their books. 

The sajne means that helped Mahomet with 
the Arabians, have been, . in latter times, very 
serviceable to the Jesuits, in China. How would 
these cunning fathers have obtained admission 
for their religion among the Chinese, had they 



i:,C00glc 



not referred to Confucius, in aid of their doctrines r 
These are. only instances of changes in reli^on; 
but- the case is precisely the Same in other things. 
In the eastern nations, no improvementris adopted^ 
be it of what kind it may, merely because it i« 
an improvement. The Chinese are acquainted 
with the use of glass ; yet their mirrors arc always 
made of metal, and their windows of oyster-shells. 
Mechanical watches have been for ages used at 
the court of Fekin ; hut the bulk of the nation 
depend upon 6re and water*. 

It is evident from the above, that the Gipsey«, 
by reason of their eastern origin, and consequent 
way of thinking, are not easily made to change 
their principles and habits. When we further 
consider the circumstances under whith these 
people have hitherto existed, we want nothing 
more to make us comprehend why they have 
> remained, to the present time, what they were at 
. i their first arrival in Europe. 

Figure to yourself a person, in whom custom, 
and deep-rooted affections, are the only, and at 
the satne time strong, impulses to action; in whose 
soul no new unwonted thoughts arise, in con- 
sequcrice of his own reflections, nor find easy 

' The instruriieDts used by tbe Chinne for marking time, act 
either by fire or water. Those that act by water, somewhat 
resemble our large hour-glasses : those by fire, are composed of 
sweet tmelling powder, made np into a sort of match. 



.C.twgit: 



admittanee when proposed by others ! — leave this 
nan entirely to himself; do not permit any of 
• 4bose means to be used which are requisite to give 
a new turn to his ideas, and deep-rooted prgu- 
dices; — he must necessarily remain the same; and 
bis latest posterity wilt continue like him: this is ^ 
' exactly^ «he case with the Gipseys. Unused to 
f reflect, fettered by habits, they arrived in our ' 
quarter of the globe. No state has, hitherto, 
done any thing for the express purpose' of in- 
1 structing or reforiping them ; except the Empress 
Theresa, by her regulations, which were never 
put in execution. On their ör&t arrival, they 
procured passports, and free quarters, by their 
holy lies. They dispersed, bega-ed, deceived the 
common people, by fortune telling : they stole : 
and for a long time no attention was paid to them. 
At last the evil grew too enormous ; the complaints 
against them became so loud, that government 
was constrained to take official notice of them.. 
Exemplary punishments were judged necessary : 
lianging and beheading were not sufficiently effica- 
- cious ; and it was then thought expedient to 
banish them ; — a proceeding more likely to render 
;them worse than better, and even in other re- 
spects liable' to many objections ; ^still the custom 
has prevailed, down to the latest times. The 
neighbour, to whom these unpolished guests werfe 
. sent, sooner or later, followed, the same method 



i:;Cooglc 



of discBgapng the evil, till, in the end, they were 
' persecuted by almost all kingdoms and government^. 
Many states afterwards relaxing in their severity, 
the Gipscys were suffered to creep in, a few at a 
time, and were permitted to remain quiet: yet 
every one of. them stood in fear, innocent or 
guilty, lest he might b« taken unawares, merely 
because he was Gtpsey, and delivered over to the . 
executioner. They had been accustomed, in their 

• own country, to live remote from cities and 
towns: now they became still more uniformly 
inhabitants of the forests, and outcasts; as, in 
consequence of the search which .was made after 
them, or at least threatened to be made, they 
judged themselves to be more secure 'in desert» 

-and concealment, than they wouUI have been z^;. 
if frequeuting places of established , abode, and 
having free intercourse with the civijised inhabit- 
ants: whereby they were divested of the most, 
perhaps only, probable means of inducing them 
to' change their maners. And yet, had they not 
sequestered themselves fro^n other people, or haid 
they been more inclined to mix in socie^, it is 
not likely, without some .direct interference of 
government, that they would have been rendered 
better. There were two great obstacles to be sur- 
mounted : — first, by mere intercourse, it would 
have been, generally speaking, difficult to eradi- 

<cate the prejudices and customs from their Oriental 



i'vCoogIc 



I minds: secondly, being Gipseys, people would 

I i not willingly, have established any correspondence 

f with them. \jtt us reflect how difltrent they arc 

I from Europeans : the one is white, the other 

i' blatk; — this clothes himself, the other goes half 

naked; — this shudders at the thought of eating 

; 1 carrion, • the other regales on it as a dainty. 

■ ■ Moreover these people are famed, and were even 

from their first appearance in Europe, for being 

plunderers, thieves, and incendiaries: the European, 

in consequence, not merely dislikes, but hates 

■ them. For the reasons above stated, the Gipseys 

\ have been, at different periods, driven from all 

the countries of Europe; and only a few simple 

people occasionally made a nearer acquaintance, 

in order to consult them on matters of superstition. 

Sucli is the state of what has been done, and 

attempted, for the improvement of the Gipseys; 

whereas, so soon as it was discovered that they 

were strangers, who thought of nothing less than 

\ of returning into their own country, if any.plan 

had been acted upon for their reformation, and 

only half the wise regulations left behind by the 

Empress Theresa in her states for the management 

of these people been adopted, and duly enforced, 

thej would long ago have been divested of the 

rude nature of their ancestors, and have ceased to 

be the uncultivated branches of a wild stock. On 

the contrary, haying always been eithei* left to them- 



>;,l,ZDdbyG00gIt: 



selves, or persecuted, it could not be otherwise, 
f but that they must remain for ever, and in all 
places, the same. 

Perhaps it is reserved for our age, in which so 
much has been attempted for the benefit of 
maoktnd, to humanise a people who, for centuries, 
have wandered in error and neglect^' and it 
may be hoped, that while we are etideavouring 
to ameliorate the condition of our African brethren, 
the civilisation of the Gipseys, who form so large 
a portion of humanity, will not be overlooked. 
It cannot be denied, that, considering the multi- 
tude of them, their reform must' be an; object of 
very serious consideration to many states. Sup- 
pose, according to a rough estimate, that the Gipseys 
in Hungary and Transylvania, including the Banat, 
amount to upwards of one hundred thousand; 
what a difference would it not make, in those 
countries, if one hundred thousand inhabitants, 
mostly loungers, beggars, cheats, and thieves, 
who now reap where they have not sown, com 
suming the fruits of others' labour, were to become 
industrious useful subjects! Their i-eformation 
would' be a difficult task, as the attempts made by 
the Empress Theresa evinced-: — a boy (for you 
must begin with children, an<l not meddie with the 
old stock, on whom no efforts will have effect) 
. would frequently seem in the most promising train 
to civilisation ; on a suddep his wild nature would 



i:,C00glc 



/appear, a relapse follow, and he became a perfect 
Gipsey again. ' But the measure is not, theretore, 
impossible : Was not the case precisely the same 
with the Saxons, whom Charles the Great con- 
verted to Christianity ? Let the state resolving to 
, appropriate the Gipsey tribe only persevere in ita 
\ endeavours ; some effect will be gained on the 
second generation, and with the third or 'fourth, 
the end will certainly be accomplished. 

By an attentive observation, we may perceive 
that the Gipseys arc endued with very good capa-_ 
cities, which promise to make a profitable return, 
for much trouble bestowed upon them. In the 
first Section one attempt, made on this speculation, 
, is produced, and it is hoped it will be found 
sufficiently complete, to exhibit the leading features 
of their character, 
f The origin of the Gipseys has remained aperfect 
'/philosopher's stone till a late period. For more 
i than two hundred years, people have been anxious 
\ to discover who these guests were, that, under the 
name of Gipseys, came, unknown and uninvited, 
■ into Europe, in the fiJiecjitlLjcentury, and have 
chosen to remain here ever since. No enquirer 
ever broached an opinion that met with his suc- 
cessor's approbation ; a fourth scarcely heard what 
. a, third had said, before he passed sentence and 
advapced something new. We have no reason to 
wonder at the miscarriage of these enquiries, which 



i.vCoogIc 



,vrcK neither more nor less than a collection of con- 
jectures founded on ima^nary proofs and partial 
speculation.-— An author set to work, to discover a 
cbUDby whence the Gipseys came, or a people to 
whom they could belong ; he found out a place 
which had been named, for instance, Zeugitana, 
or a people who bore some faint resemblance to 
the Gipseys. As one coal lights another, so these 
two similarities became perfectly applicable to the ' 
people whose origin he was seeking j he stopped 
here, and published his discovery. 

Several investigators laid their foundation on 
hearsay, and unauthenticated evidence ; they then 
endeavoured to assist this testimony by modelUng 
the extraneous circumstances which could not be . 
passed over, in order to make them coincide; if, 
notwithstanding all this, difficulties still occurred, 
they borrowed Alexander's sword, and cut the 
knot which no milder means could undo. 

That this has been the mode of proceeding hi- 
therto, will be frequently proved in the courseof the 
work. Even had the imagination not magnified any 
thing, nor modelled circumstances agreeably to its 
own fancy, yet the following, which is taken for 
granted, " that two people resembling each other in 
. " one or two particulars, must be ascended from the 
" same stock" is an over-hasty conclusion. In the 
first place, reject that the most different nations 



i:,C00glc 



may agree in some points ; further, make the allow- 
ance for various parts of the world producing inha- 
bitants of similar shape and colour; — What, then, 
remains to prove that the Gipseys are descended 

i from any one of the people from whom they have 
been traced ? 

Then! are no records, or historical soufces, lead- 
ing to a direct discovery of the origin of the Gip- 

,seys; those which have been thought so, are not 
genuine. Nothing, therefore, remains, but to 
seek the truth, through circuitous tracks ; by this 

. means, it may certainly be found. A man must not 
go to tombstones, recently erected, in German 
church-yards, nor adduce a single custom, or the 
name of a country bearing a resemblance to that of 
Gipsey, as grounds of proof: and, on the oiher 
hand, overlook a hundred difficulties, or even posi- 
tive contradictions. But if the language oj the Gip- 
1 sa/s, their name, the conformation of their boäiet 

1 and minds, their customs and religious principles, 
mark a counti-y where it is possible Jor them to have 
been indigenous ; when Historic and Chronobgy cor- 
roborate the supposition, and there is not am/ other 
country in the world to which the Gipseys, all these 

■ particulars taken together, could belong ; then the 
country, where these circumstances meet, must, in 

■ all probability, be their true mother country. 

Whether their Hindostan origin has so much i» 



■L;,.;,i,z.db,.CoOglc 



Xlll 

its favour, is more than we dare venture to affirm ; 
as it is very possible for the judgment to be so de- 
ceived, that we may believe what does not, in fact, 
exist. However, on perusing the subsequent pages, 
our readers will judge if, like our predecessors, we 
have erred, or have discovered the truth. 



., ,z,3.,CoogIc 



i:;Cooglc 



DISSERTATION 



G I F S E Y S. 



SECTION I. 

»KSCRIPTION Of TUE GIPSEYS. THEm MANNER OF LUTE 
THEla CUSTOMS AND PROPERTIES. 



CHAPTER I. 

Various Appellations of these People. 

J.T is not uncommon for the same people to be 
called by different names, in dlflFerent nations; 
Buch is the case with tlie Gipseys. The French 
received their first accounts of them from' Bohe- 
mia; which occasioned their ^ving them the 
name of Bohemians (Bok^miens): the Dutch, 
«opposing they came from Kgypt, called them He^t- 
thens (Hofäem), In Denmark, Sweden, and some 
parts of Germany, Tartars were thought of: the 
Moors and Arabians, perceiving the propensity' 
the Gipseys have to thieving, adopted the name 



i.vCoogIc 



Charami (robbers) ibr them. In Hungary, they 
were formerly called Pharaohites (Pharaoh nepek, 
Pharaoh's people); and the vulgar, in Transylvania, 
continue that name for them. The English do not 
differ much from these latter (calling them Egypt- 
ians — Gipseys); any more than the Portuguese and 
Spaniards (Gitanoi). The Clementines, in Smymia, 
use the appellation Madjub ; and the inhabitants 
of tlie lesser Bucharia, that of Diqjii. The name 
of Zigeuner has obtained the most general adoption : 
the Gipseys ar» so called not only in all Germany, 
Italy, and Hünga.ry (Tzigany), but frequently in 
Transylvania, Wallachia, and Moldavia (Cyganis). 
Moreover the Turks, and other eastern nations, 
have no other than this name for them (Tschin* 
genh) ; and perhaps the before-cited Diajii of the 
Buchanans may be the very same. It has been 
gaid, they call themselves Moors; but that is false; 
Moor is only an adjunct^ not the name of any ■ 
people : it is really a pity, since this name would 
have been so fair a pretence to make Amorites of. 
them, as some writers have done! It is not by 
any means proved, that the. modem Greeks. c^led 
them Athingans ; this opinion is supported more 
by the arbitrary assertions of some learned men, 
than by real facts ; which is also the case with the 
rest' of the catalogue of oanies that have beeu 
dispersed, in various treatises on the origin of the 
Gipseys ; as will be hereafter demonstrated. 



i:,C00gIC 



CHAPTER II. 

On ike Dispersion of the Gipseys, and their Numbers, 
in Europe. -, 

The numerous hordes of Gipseys, widely dis- > 
persed over the face of the earth, are incredible. 
They wander about in Asia ; in the interior part 
of Africa they plunder the merchants of Agades * ; 
and, like locusts, have overrun mo»t of the coun- 
tries of Europe. America seems to be the only 
part of the world where they are not known ; no 
mention appearing to be made of thenl by authors 
who have written on that quarter of the globe. 
It would be superfluous to dilate on the history 
of thosein Asia and Africa, as we have no minute 
- accounts of them; we shall therefore confine our- 
selves to those in Europe. 

There are but few countries, here, which aie 
entirely free from Gifweys ; although, for centuries, 
'every state has been endeavouring to rid itself of 
them. Under King Henry VIII, and in the reign 
of Queen Elizabeth, they suflfered a general per- 

• Leo Afnconus, in hi» HUtoire NalurtUe de« ludet, ^c. p. 327» 
■ (ays of the morchiuits of Agades, that they kept great numben 
of aimtd slavi>s for their security, and- menlioils that their cara- 
vans — " sont tons vcx&z de divers pcuples du desert, cumme de 
-P91K. qu'on appelle comroun^ment Bohemen», ou Egyptiens." . 



:, Google 



4 

1' secutioti in England: there are, nevertheless, 
great numbers still to be found there. About thirty^' 7 
years ago, they even threatened to set the towü ■ 
I of Northampton on fire, because the magistrates 
I had arrested some of their young people, whose 
1 release they solicited in vain ; several of the ring- 
leaders were hanged : they had in the mean time 
I shewn plainly, that their race was very far frofn 

being annihilated. It is not uncommon, in the - 
! county of Bedford particularly, to see them lying 
y in byplaces, to the number of forty or fifty toge- 
ther : but they are cautious how they travel about 
■f. in companies, and are rarely seen in towns or 
^villages but by one at a time. 

Spain, especially the southern provinces, con- 
; tains so many of these people, that they rove 
about in large troops, threatening to plunder and 
murder travellers wliom they happen to meet in 
lonely places : at a distance from the cities, and 
where no place of refuge is near, danger is always 
to be apprehended. Swinburne rates their num- 
ber very high ; he asserts, that the loss of the Gip- 
seyswouldimmediately be perceived by the apparent 
i diminution of population. Now as Spain contains 
eleven millions of people, how considerable a draft 
must there be to render it perceptible ! Twiss also 
mentions a great many, but sums up a determinate 
' number, 40,000 ; which is certainly considerable, 
I ' but probably twice twenty,- or even twice forty, ■ 



i:,C00gIC 



5 

thousafld too few ; — unless we charge Swinburne) 
and others, with having greatly exaggerated; — : 
even admitting, that he means to h« undevstood 
as. speaking of the southern provhices only. 

In France, before the revolution,, there were 
but few, .for the obvious reason, that every I Gipsey 
who could be apprehende*!, feU a 'saciifice . to the 
police. Lorrain and Ai^atia were indetd exoepr 
tions ; they being very nunieroua tbeiip) especially 
in the forests of Lorrain. Here they scen> -to. have 
met with milder treatment; yet, according to fhe 
ajssurances of a traveller, m»ny of thepi Wfir« to be 
found in the gaols of Iiorrain. . They .ineve^ed the ^ 
more in .this district, in consequence A)f;th^ir,havine9' 
been very assiduously lookediafte*,' and driwQ from 
the dominions of a iate. Duke of DeuÄponts* 
whither his successor would not suffer them to 
"return. 

•■ They were, universally to be found in Ttaly^ iniscn 
rauch that even Sicily and Sardinia were not free. 
But they were. most nutneüdus iri the dominions, of 
Üie church ; probably because there was the worst 
police, with much superetition : by the former they 
were left undisturbed, and tlie latter enticed theüi 
to -deceive the ignorant, as it afforded them an 
opportunity -of obtaining a plentiful contribution 
by their fortune-telling, and enchanted amulets. 
There was a general law throughout Italy, that . 
no Gipsey should remain more than two night« 
c 2 

, '■ L ,_ J .Google 



, iü any one place : by this regulation, it i» true, 
no place retained its guest long ; but no sooner 

. y/was one gone, than another came 'in his room: 
/ it wa s a contmuj tl circle, and quite as convenient 
to them as a perfect toleration would have 
been. Italy rather suffered than beneBtecl by this 
law ; as, by keeping these people in constant 
motion, they would do more mischief there than 
in places where they were permitted to remain 
stationary. 

They are v«ry scarce in many parts of Germany ; 
as well a^ in Swizerland and the Ix)w-countries, 
A person may live many -years in Upper Saxony, 
or in the districts of Hanover and Brunswic, with- 
out seeing a mngle Gipsey : when one happens to 

I stray into a viltage, or town, he occasions as 
much disturbance as if the black geptleman with 
his cloven foot had appeared ; he frights children 
from their play, . and draws the attention of the 
older people; till the police officers get hold of him, 
and make him again invisible. In other provinces, 
on the contrary, particularly on the Rhine, a 
Gipsey is a very common sight. Some yeai^ ago 

: there were such numbers of them in the dutchy 
of Wirtemburg, thait they seen lying about every- 

'\ where: but as, according to custom, they either, 
U lived by thieving, by fortune-telling or other 
r tricks, plundering the illiterate people of their 
1 money, the government ordered detachments of 

L, ,z,;i.,C00gIC 



7 
soldiers to drive them from their hdeff and lurking 
places throughout the oountry ; and then trans'- 
ported the congregated swurm, in the same 
manner as they were treated by the Duke dF 
Deuxponts, as before" related. 
. In Poland and Lithuani a, as well ac in_Cour- 
land, there is an amazing number of Gipses. 
Their wayvode in Courland is distinguislied from 
the principals of hwdes in other countries ; being 
not only very much respected by his own people, 

, but, even by the Courland nobility, is esteemed a 
man of high rank, and is frequently to be met 
witli at entertainments and card parties in the first 
families, where he is always a welcome guest. 
His dress is uncommonly rich, ia comparison with 

. others of his tribe ; generally silk in summer, and 
constantly velvet ,in winter. The common Gip- 
seys, on the contrary, are, in every particnlar, ex- 
.actly like their brethren in other, countries : eveft 
with regard to religion, they shew the same levity 
and indifference; — they suffer their children to. b« 
several times baptised ; now they profess them- 
selves to be Catholics, then Lutherans, apd pre- 
sently after nothing at all. ] 

That tliey are to be found in Denmark, and 

Swed en, is certain, but how numeroua they est 

in tho'^e countries we cannot aiffirm ; and therefore 

proceed to the south-east of Europe. 

The countries in this part seem to be the general 



■rendezvous of the Gipseys : their number amounts 
in Huu^ary, according to a probable statement, 
to upwards of 50,000 ; and in the distiicfs of the 
Banat, Grisellini assures us, that when Count 
Clary occupied the situation of president, they 
were : reckoned at 5500: yet they appear to be 
Still more numerous in Transylvania. It is not 
only Mr. Benko, a German writer, who says they 
swarm upon the land like locusts, but we have 
also certain calculation, wherein their numbers ai'e 
estimated at between 35 and 36,000. 

Cantemir says, the Gipseys are dispersed all ■ 
over Moldavia, where eveiy baron has several 
families of them subject to him; in Wallacbia, 
and the Sclavonian countries, they are quite as 
numerous. In Wallachia and Moldavia they are 
divided into two classes — the princely, and bo- 
jarish: the former, according to Sulzer, amounts 
to many thousands; but that ia trifling, in com- 
parison with thp latter, as there is not a single, 
bojar in Wallachia who has not at least three or 
four of them for slaves ; the rich have ofteii some 
hundreds each; under their command. 

Bessarabia, all Tartary, Bulgaria, Greece, and 
Romania, swarnu-with them; even in Constan- 
tinople tliey are innumerable, In Romania, a 
large tract of Mount Hapmus, which they inhabit 
has acquired from them the name Tsckenghe Valkan 
(Gipscy Mountain), This district extends fion\ 



the city Aydos, quite to Phjlippopolls, and con- 
tains more Gipseys than any other province in the 
Turkish empire. 

From what has been advanced, the reader 
tvill be enabled to form some conception, how con- 
siderable a class of, people the Gipseys are in' I 
Europe ; independent of their numbers in Egypt^ / 
and some parts of Asia. 

If we could obtain an exact estimate of them 
in the ditferent countries, or if the unsettled 
life of these people did not render it extremely 
difBcuIt, perhaps impossible, to procure such in- 
formation, the immense number would probably 
greatly exceed what we have any idea of. At a ■■ 
moderate calculation, without being extravagant, 
they might be reckoned at between 7 and 800,000. < 
I What a serious matter of consideration when we ■ 
j reflect, that the greatest part of these people are ' 
idlers, cheats, and thieves! What a field does this 
open for the contemplation of goremments !■-»■ j 
But more of this in another place. 



L;,.;,l,ZDdbyG00g.It: . 



CHAPTER III. 

The Properties of their Bodies. 

Had ihe Gipseys made but a temporary appearance, 
«nd we could only be acquainted witb them from 
the publications of fonner centuries. It would be 
difficult to entertain any other idea than that they 
were a herd of monsters and beelzebubs. We find 
i(i those books frequent mention of a savage pe(^le, 
iiack hörnernen. But now. that they ha^e conti- 
nued to pur time, and we have an opportunity of 
seeing, with our own eyes, how they are formed, 
and what appearance they make, they are so fortu- 
nate as to have authors who commend their beauty, 
and take great pains to set fortli their advantages ; 
tjioiigh many, indeed most" of the modems, their 
colour and looks being the same, perfectly agree 
with the writers of past centuries, in their accounts 
of them, .Both parties may be in the right, when 
we consider, that what appears beautiful in the eyes 
■of one person, is possibly ugly and deformed in the 
eyes of another : this depends entirely upon habit 
and familiarity. For this reason, the dark brown, 
or olive coloured, skin of the Gipse}S, with their 
white teeth appearing between their red lips, may 
be a disgusting sight' to an European, unaccus- ' 
tomed to such objects. Let us only ask, As child- 



, Cookie 



u 

reo, have we not, at some .time or other, mo, 
affrighted from a Gipsey ? The case will be entirely 
altered, if we divest ourselves of the idea that a 
black skin is disagreeable. Their white teeth; 
their long black hair, on which they pride them- 
selves very highly, and will not sulFer to be cut off; 
their lively black rolling eyes ; — are, without dis- 
pute, properties which must be ranked among the 
list of beauties, eyen by the modern civilised Euro- 
pean world. They are neither m^rgrown giants, 
nor diminutive dwarfs : their limbs are formed in 
the justest proportion. Large bellies are, among 
them, as uocommofi as ]iump-bdcks, blindness, or 
other corporeal defects." When Grisellini asserts 
that the breasts of the Gipsey women, at the time 
of their nursing, increase to a larger size than the 
chi!d they support, it is an assertion destitute of- 
proof, and parallel with many other arguments he 
adduces to prove the Gipseys are Egyptians. Pro- 
bably he may have confounded himself, by think- 
ing of the Hottentots ; the circumstance above 
mentioned being true of them, though not of the 
Gipseys. Every Gipsey is naturally endued with 
agility, great suppleness in, and the free use of, 
his limbs : these qualities are perceptible in his 
whole deportment, but in an extraordinary degree 
whenever he happens to be surprised in an improper 
place-: in the act of lliieving, with a stolen goose 
or fowl in his hand, he runs off so nimbly, that^^ 

L, ,z;;i .Cookie 



unless his pursuer be on horseback, the Gipsey is 
sure to escape. These people are blessed with an 
astonishingly good state of liealth. ' Neither wet 
nor dry weather, heat nor cold, let the extremes 
follow each other never so quickly, seems to have 
any effect on them. Gipseys are fond of a great 
degree of heat; ^helr supreme luxury is, to lie cjay • 
i^^ and night so near the fire, as to be in danger of 
' burning : at the same time they can bear to travel 
I in the severest cold bareheaded, with no other 
1 covering than a torn shirt, or some old rags cate- 

■ lessly thrown over them, without fear of catching 
■ cold, cough, or any other disorder. 

'l By endeavouring to discover the causes of these 

t bodily qualities of the Gipseys, we find them, or at 

least some of them, very evidently arising from 

their education and manner of life. They are lean ; 

: but how should they be corpulent? as they are 

■ seldom guilty of excess in eating or drinking ; for if 
they get a full meal to-day, they must not repine 

I should they be under the necessity of keeping fast 
j to-morrow and the next day. They have iron consti- 
^ tutions, because they have been brought up haidily. 
The pitiless mother takes her threc-roonths-oU 
[ (ihild uponher back, and wanders about in fair or 
foul weather, in heat or cold, without troubling 
'; her head what may happen to it When a boy at- 
tains the age of thi-ee years, his lot becomes still 
harder. While an infant, and his age reckoned by 



i.vCoogIc 



weeks and months, hewas at least wrapped up' 
^ closely in rags ; but now, deprived even of these, 
lie is, equally with his parents, exposed to the ri- 
gour of the elements, for want of covering ': he is 
now put to trial how far his legs will carry him, 
and must be content' to travel about, with, at most, 
no other defence for his feet than thin socks. 
Thus he grows up, and acquires his good health by ■ 
hardship and misery. We may as easily account 
for the colour of the Gipsey's skin. The tap- 
landers, Saraoieds, as well as the Siberians, like- ' 
wise, have brown yellow-coloured skins, in conse- 
quence of living, from their childhood, in> smoke 
and dirt, in the same manner as the Gipseys ; these 
would, long ago, have been divested of their 
/ swarthy complexions, if they had discontinued their 
filthy mode of living. Only observe aGipsey from 
his birth, till he reaches man's estate; and you must 
be convinced that their colour is not so much,owing 
to their descent, as to the nastiness of their bodies. 
In summer, the child is exposed to the scorching 
sun ; in winter, it is shut up in a smoky hyt. It is 
not uncommon for mothers to smear their childreq 
4- over with a black ointment, and leave them to fry 
in the sun or near the fire. They seldom trouble 
themselves about washing, or other modes of clean- ' 
ing themselves. Experience also shews us, tliat the 
dark colour of the Gipseys, which is continued 
from generation to genei-alion,'is more the effect of 



i :,■ Google 



education, and manner of life, than descent. 
Among those who profess music in Hungary, oi: 
' x serve in the Imperial army, where they have learnt 
to pay more attention to order and cleanliness, 
tliere are many to be found whose extraction is not 
at all discernible in their colour; though they had, 
probably, remained to the age of twelve or fourteen 
years under the care of their filthy parents; and 
must necessarily, when they first adopted a differ- 
ent mode of fife, have borne the marks of the dirt 
contracted during this period. How much less, 
then, should we be able to distinguish a Gipsey if 
taken when a child from its sluttish mother, and 
brought up under some cleanly person ! By the 
- same reasoning we may account for their white 
1 teeth and sound limbs ; namely, from their manner 
' of life. The former are evidences of their spare 
■ diet : the latter prove them to hare been' reared 
more according to the dictates of nature, than 
thoge of art and tenderness. 



■L;,.;,-z.d=,GqOglc 



CHAPTER IV. 

On their Food and Beverage. 

Those Gipseya who are more connected with civi- 
lised people' are not remarkable in- their diet; 
though- it ia to be observed of them, that they are 
by no means particular in their cookery. The 
others, on the contrary, have their table furnished 
in a very irregular and extraordinary way. Some- 
times they fast, or at best have only breaid and 
water to subsist upon ; at other times they regale 
on fowls and geese. Tlie greatest luxury- to ibeni 
is, when tliey can procure a roast of cattle that' : 
have died of apy distemper. It is the same to them, , 
whether it be the cairion of a sheep, hog, cow, or ' l 
other beast, horse-flesh only excepted: they are so ; 
far from being disgusted with it, that to eat their ■ 
fill of such a meal is to them the height of epi- \ 
curism. When any person censures their taste, or ! 
shews surprise at if, they answer,' " The flesh of a * 

/ " beast which God ki!l^ must be better than that of > 
'^ one killed by the hand of man : " they therefore ' 
embrace every opporitmity of getting such dainties. | 
That they take carrion from the laystalh, as is af- 
firmed of the Gipseys in Hungary, is not probable, 

' any more tlian that they eat horse-flesh. . But if a 
beast out of a herd die, and they find it before it 



i:,C00glc 



become rotten and putrefied j or if a farmer give 
them notice of a cow dead in the stable ; they pro- 
ceed, without hesitation, to get possession of the 
booty. They are particularly fond of animals tliat 
have been destroyed by fire; therefore, whenever 
a conflagration has happened, either in town or 
country, the next day the Gipses, from every 
neighbouring quarter, assemble, and draw the suf- 
focated, half consumed, beasts out of the ashes. 
Men, women, and children, in troops, are ex- 
tremely busy, joyfiiliy carrying the flesh home to 
their dwellings : tl^ey return several times, provide 
themselves plentifully with this roast meat, and 
gluttonise in their huts as long as their noble fare 
lasts. Their manner of dressing this delicious food 
is curious : — they boil or roast what is intended 
for the first day ; if they have more than they can 
^devour at once, the remainder is citlier dried in the 
sun, or smoked in their huts, and eaten without 
any further preparation. 

Something might here be introduced concerning 
their relish for human flesh, and the instaacea 
'■"' which some years ago happened in Hungary mi^t 
be adduced as proofs *, were it not ükely to be ob- - 

• Beylrage zum Rficit Postratter, St. 71. 1783. »On the ■ 
21st of August there was a dreadrul execution at Frauentnark iii 
the Hortenser country. Thirteen delinquents, Gipsejs, who had 
existed twelve years by robbing on the highway, and were accus- 
tomed to eat the bodies of those they had murdered, were brought 



:, Google 



17 
jected, that these examples are at variance with 
common experience, as well as with the old ac- 
counts handed down to us concerning these people. 
We shall, therefore, not insist on this accusation : 
but entirely give up the point of Gipseys being 
men-eaters, except just hinting, that it would be 
expedient for governments to be- watchful. But 
the instances in Hungary do not appear, by any 
means, so casual and uncommon as people may 
imagine. — What, according to the strictest exami- 
nation, has been done, not by one, but many ; not 
by ten, but even two hundred, and perhaps by thou- 
sands; not yesterday and Xa-day, but many years 
back ; finally, not by the whole body together, but 
single parties by themselves, in different places: 
Shall these things be deemed only casual excesses? 
Should it be asserted, in addition to this, that 
eating human flesh is in practice and allowed, in 
the country whence tliey originate ; we might with 
greater probability mention this shocking fact, of 
/feeding on human flesh, as a pre\'ailing cu«tom 
- among the G ipseys. This circumstance is expressly 
mentioned in histories : wliich assure us, that 

to punishment. Four of ilicni were women, who were behead- 
ed; of th« remaining nine men, six were hanged, two were 
broken on ihe wheel, and the leader of this inhuman gang was 
qiinrtered alive. !t is said that one hundred and fifteen more, of 
tbcse European cannibals, remain in the county gaols." See 
App.en.rix. " 



i.vCoogIc 



anatmg the particular elate of peopTe from whom 
the Gipseys sprung, it is a loDg-established' custom 
for the nearest relatiou» and friends to kill and eat 
each other. It is unnecessary to bring proof of it 
in this place, as it belongs to the second section : 
kt it suffice just to have hinted the matter, in order ■ 
that it may be known towards what people we are 
to look for the origin of the Gipseys. As to the 
objection, that »nong all the crimes with which 
they have been charged in the older writings, - 
eating humanfiesh ia not positively allcdged agunst 
them, it may be obviated hy more than one an- 
swer. In the first place, let it be observed, history 
relates, and the event in Hungary confirms, that 
they murder one another ; further, consider their 
■wandering mode of life ; lastly, that they generally 
abide in bypl.aces : and all may be easily accounted 
for. A hundred fathers may sacrifice their children 
to their voluptuousness, and the crime still remain 
concealed. The absent person- is not missed; as 
hobody watches over a family continually in mo- 
tion, and every-where a stranger. Just as unlikely 
is it, that information should be given to govern- 
ment. There is no reason to suppose any of their 
own people would think it their duty to inform; 
as, not being contrary to their usual practice, they 
do not esteem it wrong. It is very possible for 
them to have destroyed many other people, without 
the circumstances being recorded in the courts of 



, .Cookie 



19 
justice, or noticed in the annual puWicatioiis. Who 
ever thought to enquire of thttn after any travell« 
that, far distant from hi» own country, might 
have fiillen into their hands and been cut off ? , Or 
how are the remains of the poor victim to be traced, 
iftheydevouf what is eatable, and burn the bones?* 

* HimbuTgh. Neve Zeitiaig, 151. St. 1782. " Hungary, 4lh 
«f September. — The following h to be added conccroiog the mur- 
derers and man-eatere. Forty of these miscreAots have already 
undergone their dräerved punishment, in three' separate places. 
Some, as lately communicated, were broken upon ibo wheel 
tiom below upwards ; two of the most atrocious were quartered 
alive ; and the remainder, one huvdred and fifteea in number, 
-will shortly be proceeded against in the same manner. This band 
has existed twenty-one years, and in the course of that tint« sacri- 
ficed eighty-four people to their cruelty. Every fc-cliog raiod 
■ must be struck with horror at the internal ra^c of these European 
, cannibals, oa bearing their confession — that once at a wedding 
they killed three people, whom they ate with, their guesU, in the 
greatest festivity and joy! They prefer the flesh of a young 
person from sixteen to eighteen yeara old. They burnt tbe banes« 
which, accorditig to (heir account, make excellent coals. A 
life-guard man of the country undertook tosecdre and succeeded in 
taking their iaivmpaxha or leader. This cannibal hero was magni* 
iicently dressed, and wore onuuoents in his cap to tho value of six 
thousand guilders." 

Trani/^er Stiuti Bittretto, Nr. 157. 1783. " Doitau Stroim, 
iQib September. — We mention with horror, that besidii those in- 
humU) wretches. who have already been put to the sword in Huti- 
gary, there are one hundred and fifty still in chains ; and some 
thousands mot« are, with good foundation, suspected. They are 
all Gipseys. Maria Theresa Jud given orders that all these h\f 



.Google 



Those Hungarian wretches have, according to 
their own account, for twelve years gratified their 
horrid cravings, undiscovered by the magistrates, 
in a country where the police is by no means 
bad: perhaps they might have continued unsu- 

tnan vermin should be driven from their boles, and c(»Dpe1Ied to 
live in villages : but that wise regulation was not enforced, and 
the evil U now grown to such a height as scarcely to be remedied 
without a total extirpation <^ them." 

Hamburgh. Unpartheiuch. Corrcspondnt. Nr. 159. 1782. 
" Hungary, 2ad September, — Beside:« those Gipaey cannibals 
which were cxecute<) on the S3d of August, at Fraumaric, there 
were fifteen of these barbarians put to death on the twenty-fourth 
at Kameza; and on the twenty-sixth, thirteen more at Esabrag. 
In the fcmner place were seven women beheaded, five men hanged, 
two broken alive on the wheel, and one quartered alive. At the 
latter place Seven women were beheaded, four men hanged 
and two broken on the wheel. Many still remain in confine- 
ment; among whom is one who acted as priest, and married 
people for two groschens a time. Their hanimpaicha, who, as 
we lately advised, was taken by a very simple stratagem, cannot 
yet be brought to any confession of his crimes." 
' Frmkfitrter Staat» RUtTeito, Nr. 207. 1782. " Doftm SlroAm, 
34th December. — Not long ago it was published, that forty-five 
of the men-eaters had been executed in Hungary. One hundred 
and fifty still remain in prison, whose sentence has, by express 
orders from court, betn respited. Her majesty, not thinking it 
possible that the people in confinement could have been guilty of 
•uch enormous crimes, sent a commissary thither from court to 
examine minutely into the affiiir. On his return it was confirmed 
that they were really men-eaten; and that there are actually 
amooji tliem (ona «ho have killed and eaten their own fathers." 



i:,C00gIC 



SI 
Spected for ever, had they not laid their unlucUy 
hands on the people of the country, thereby brin^ 
ing on 3 strict enquiry, and rendering the discovery 
more easy. Nor do the older writings seem to be 
entirely silent on tills head; at least there is an ap- 
pearance of something of the H'^d in them. Many . 
authors mention the Gipseys stealing people, and 
accuse them particularly of lying in wait for young 
. children. Others again deny this, saying, that 
the Gipseys have brats enough of their own, and 
therefore have not the least rea»)n to covet strange 
children. How does the matter look, if we sup- 
pose they did not want to rear these children, but 
to sacrifice them to their inordinalte appetite ? — and ' 
the Hungarian intelligence expressly says, they ■ 
were particularly fond of young subjects. What | 
renders the truth' of this accusation in the old 
writings suspicious, is, that before even a single 
Gipsey had set his foot in Europe, the Jews lay - 
under the same imputation. Perhaps in this, as ■ 
in many other instances, the calumny invented ; 
against the Jews might be afterwards transferred 
to the Gipseys. This alone considered, the impu- 
tation of kidnapping children might become doubt- 
ful; but then occurs the weighty circu instance, 
that it has been judicially proved in England; and, 
in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, an act of parlia- 
ment was passed on the occasion. Enough of 
this; let people reason upon the cannibal appetite 

L, ,_ ;l .Cookie 



2« 
of äie Gipseys as th^ pteise, there will always re- 
main ground for suspicion. 

After having shewn how little delicate they are 
in «atisfying their appetites, we should scarcely 
expect to 6nd them squeamish with regard to 
articles of diet that are highly esteemed among 
civilised people. But Griselini gives a long cata- 
logue of things which, he says, are disagreeable 
to a Gipseys palate; among which, he particu- 
larly mentions beans and onions, red bream» 
pearch, lampreys, with every kind of wild-fowl. 
Whereas the fact is, Gipseys not only eat bean» 
and onions, but ^e very fond of them ; and as 
for the red bream, pearch and lampreys, phcas&iits, 
partridges, &;c. their only reason for abstaining from 
them is, the difficulty of procuring them : in which 
they 3ie not singular; many other people being in 
the same predicament. 

i The Gipseys are not much accustomed to baking 

of bread; that is an article which they usually 

' buy, beg or steal, or go entirely M'lthouL If by 

chance they do bake, the business is performed 

, quite in the eastern method : — a wood fire is made 

V on the ground, which soon becooies embers ; in ' 

- -4- the mean time the moth^ kneads her dough, forms 
it into small cakes, lays them on the hot ashes^ 
and thus they are baked. 

To eat with a knife and fork, ü no part of a 
Gipsey's pcditeness; nor is a table or plate 



:, Google . 






S3 

thought necessary : even a dish is frequently dis- 
pensed with. The whole kitchen and table appa- 
ratus consists of an eaithen pot, an iroQ.pan 
(which is also used as a dish), a kuife, and a spoon. 
When the meal is ready, all the family sit around V 
the pot or pan, the boiled or roast is divided into 
pieces, on which they fall-to; their teeth and fingers 
serving them for knives and forks, as does the 
ground for table and plates. I 

The common beverage of the Gipseys is water ; 
now and then beer, when it costs them nothing. 
Wine is too expensive, nor is it particularly grateful 
to them. The case is very diflfereat when brandy 
comes in question, of which they are immoderately 
fond. They feel great pleasure in intoxicating^ t/ 
themselves ; which being easiest and soonest effected 
withbrandy, itisintheiresteemtheonlyliquorworth 
purchasing; all they can earn goes that way : and 
whenever by chance they become possessed of a 
penny, it is expended at the firet bouse where* 
bcandy is to be met with. Every christening, wed- 
ding, or other occasion of rejoicing is solemnised 
with brandy : if they have plenty of it, they, as it 
were, drive the world before them; each trying, by 
screaming or holloing, to express his felicity and 
consummate happiness. , j 

But, however great the thirst the Gipseys have t 
for brandy, it is even exceeded by their immoderate 
' love of tobacco. This is not, as mightbe supposed,, j 



.Cookie 



.24 
peculiar to the men; for the women sometimes 

/exceed them in it: and they not only smoke it, 
but chew and swallow the very leaves and stalks, 
with great avidity. That it may sooner reach its 
place of destination, aod stimulate the gums and 
tongue more forcibly, they use a pipe not longer 
than one's finger : this pipe is made of wood, for 
economical reasons — as it absorbs the moisture, 
and thereby becomes a very great Gipsey delicacy; 
for having smoked it as long as they choose, they 
gnaw it with astonishing greediness, till not a splin- 
ter remains. It is immaterial, whether the pipe be 
smoked by the person himself or another, to bring 
jtto the proper degree of perfection: he accepts it, 
as a valuable present, from any body; and is so 
char}- of if, that it frequently lasts him many days. 

, The Gipsey will abstain from food for more than 
a day, when he can procure a leaf of tobacco, or 
a piece of his pungent pipe, which he chews, drinks 
a little water, and is happy. This surely, exceed?. 
every thing that has been related of the most, 
famous smoker ! 



;i:yC00glc 



CHAPTER V. 

On the Drei* of the Gipses. 

It cannot be expected that the description of the 
dress of a set of people whose whole economy be- 
longs to the class of beggars, should exhibit any 
thing but poverty and want. The first of them 
that came to Europe appeared ragged and misera- 
ble—unless we perhaps allow their leaders to have 
been an exception ; — in like manner their descend- 
ants have continued for hundreds of years, and 
stiil remaJR.' This is particularly remarkable in the 
countries about the mouth of the Danube, which 
abound witli Gipseys; namely, Transylvania, Hun- 
gary, and Türkey in' Europe, where they dress 
even more negligently than in other parts. 

The Gipseys consider a coV'ering for the head a» 
perfectly useless: the wind will not easily blow his 
hat off, who never wears any tlung of the kind, 
excepting when he has a mind to make a figure, 
and even then a rough cap usually supplies its 
place. During the winter, if the female Gipseys 
do not knit socks, which those in Moldavia and 
Wallachia do, with wooden needles, he winds a 
couple of rags round bis feet, which in summer 
are laid aside as unnecessary. He is not better 
furnished with linen, as the womea neither spig, ' 



i.vCoogIc 



26 

sew, nor wash. For want of change, what he 
once puts on his body, remains till it falls off of 
itself. His whole dress often consists of only a 

,- pair of breeches and a torn shirt 

We are not to suppose, from what is said above, 
■that the Gipseys are indifferent about dress; (m the 

, contrary, they love fine clothes to an eictravagant 
d^ree : Ute want proceeds from necessity, which 
is become with them a second nature, forgetting 
that labour and care are the means to procure 
dotheg, as welt as nourishment. Whenever an 
oi^rtunity offers of acquiring a good coat, either 
by gift, purchase, or thefV, the Gipsey immediately 
bestirs himself to become master of it: possessed 
of the prize, he puts it on directly, without coa- 
«dering in the least, whether it suits the rest of 
his apparel. If his dirty shirt had holes in it as big 
as a bam door, or his breeches were so out of con- 
dition that Mie might perceive their antiquity at the 
first glance ; were he unprovided with shoes, stock- 
ings, or a covering for the head ; neither of these 
defects would prevent his strutting about in a laced . 
coat, feeling himself of still greater consequence in 
case it happened to be a red one. Martin Kelpius 
therefore says, that the Gipseys in Traniyivania 
spend all Üieir earnings in aleh<Hisea and in clothe. 
It would excite laughter in the sternest philosopher,^- 
to see a Gipsey parading lüxiut, vitli a beaver, 
ha^ a silk or red cloth ooa^ at the same time his 



i:,C00gIC 



breeches torn, and hisshoes or boots, if perchance 
he have either, covered with patches. 

Benko, also, assures us, that this kind of state 
is cammOD in Transylvania; and adds, theOipseys * 
are particularly fond of clothes made after the Hun- 
garian fashion, or which had been worn by people 
of distinction. The habits and properties »f the 
Gipseys in Hungary are precisely the same. The 
following passage, which appeared in the Impe- 
rial Gazettes, is veiy much to the purpose: " Not- 
" withstanding these people are so wretched, that 
" they have nothing but rags to cover them, which 
" do not at all fit, and -are scai-cely sufficient tohide ' 
" their nakedness, yet they betray their foolish taste 
" and vain ostentation whenever they have ah op- " 
" portunity." 

In Transylvania, some of them wear the Walla- 
chian dress; but in Hungary they are so attached 
to the habits of the country, that a Gipsey had ra- 
ther go half naked, or wrap himself up in a sack, 
than he would condescend to wear a foreign garb, 
even though a very good one were given tohim. 

_ Green is a favourite colour with the Gipseys; 

, but scarlet is held in so great esteem by them, that 
a man cannot appear abroad in a red habit, thongh 
worn out, without being surrounded by a crowd 
old and young, who, in the open street^ are solicit- 
ous- to purchase of him, be it coat, pelltsse, or 
breeches. Unless severely pinched by the ciJd, or 



i^vCooglc 



ID caae of the greatest necessity, they will not deign 
to put on a boor's coat: they rather clioose to buy 
■for their own use cast-off clothes j and if they hap- 
pen ta be Ornamented with lace or loops, they strut 
about in such dresses, as proudly as if they were 
not merely lords of the district, but of the whole 
, creation. Thus all the money they can spare, is 
expended in obtaining a sort of clotites not at all 
'' becoming their station, and which answer no 
other purpose, but to betray their weak silly - 
notions, and expose them to the ridicule of the 
more sensible part of mankind. They do not pay 
the least regard to symmetry, nor care what rea- 
sonable people think of their dress: provided they 
/can only get something shining to put on, that will" 
catch the eye, they give tliemselves no concern if 
the rest of their clothing be very bad, or though 
they be nearly in a state of nudity. It is no un- 
common spectacle to see a Gipsey parading the 
streets in an embroidered pellisse, or laced coat 
decorated with silver buttons, with a dirty ragged 
shirt, barefooted, and without a hat ; or with a pair 
of embroidered scarlet breeches on, and perhaps do 
other covering but half a shirt 

Nothing pleases Hungarian Gipseys more than 

a pair of yellow (tschischmen) boots, and spurs : 

no sooner do the latter glitter on his feet, but he 

: bridles up, and marches consequentially about, 

often eying his fine boots, at the same time totally 



i:,C00gIC 



S9 • 
iegardless of his breeches, which may have lost a 
portion before or, behind, or be in some otlio' 
respects quite shabby. 

. The usual dress of the women is no better than 
that of the men; indeed they have generally been 
thought rather to go beyond them in iilth and 
nastiness. Their appearance is truly disgusting to 
any civilised person : their whole covering consists 
of, either a piece of linen thrown over the head 
and wound round the thighs, or an old shift hung 
over them, through which their smoky hides appear 
in numberless places. Sometimes, in winter, they 
wrap themselves in a piece of woollen stuff like a 
cloak. Occasionally, their dress partakes of the 
other sex ; as they do not hesitate to wear breeches, 
or other male habilament. They use the same cover- 
ing for the feet as the men ; — either a pair of coarse 
socks, knit with wooden needles, which is com- ' 
monly done in Moldavia and Wallachia; or they 
sew them up in rags, which remain on till the stuff 
perishes and falls off, or till spring arrives, at which 
Reason both men and women go barefooted*. 

The women are as fond of dress as the men, and 
equally ridiculous in their choice of it; they are often 

'About sixly years ago, ladies of the &nt quality in Petersburg^ 
used to be guilty of somewhat the same kind of irreguUritjr. 
They had begun to adopt the French modes in dress ; but, as Sal- 
mon says, did not well know how to manage them. " WherefoTe," 
he continue, " one must not be lurpnsed, notwithstanding all 
<' the state of v pcten>biit:gh la<l^, to meet one of them in sutnmcr. 



seen in a dress cap, while their rotten linen jacket. 
scarcely serves to cover their nakedness. In Spain, 
they plaster their temples with great patches of 
black «ilk; and hang all sorts of trumpery in their 
ears, besides a number of baubles about the neck. 

The Gipseys were at very little trouble respect- 
ing the dress of their children ; these ran about 
.naked, in the true Calmuc style, till ten years of 
age, when, me hoys got breeches, and the girfa 
aprons. But this nuisance is at an end in the Im- 
perial dominions, both in Germany and Hungary, 
where an order to suppress it was issued out by 
the emperor Joseph. 

Before we dismiss the subject of dress, we may 
mention a laudable custom established among the 
Gipseys, in order to save their clothes when they 
have quarreled, and mean to fight. Before they 
proceed to action, a truce takes place for a minute 
or two, to ^ve "the combatants time to strip to their 
shirts, that their apparel may not suffer in the fray : 
then the storm breaks loose, and each lays oil the 
other as hard as he can. The custom has this use 
in it, that whenever any body appears in a ragged 
coat, he may affirm, on his honour, that it was 
- not rendered so in a Gipsey brawl. 

*' at which seaton they use the English straw hats, magnificently 
*' dressed in daiuaak, ornamented with gold, silver, lace, and 
" ribbands, vralking barefooted, carrying her slippers ia her 



:, Google 



CHAPTER VI. 

On the Family Economy of the Gipseys. 

That these people are still the rude unpolished 
creatures that nature formed them, or, at most, have 
only advanced one degree towards humanity, is 
evinced, with other circumstances, by fheir family 
eCOTiomy. 

Many of the Gipseys are stationary, havingre- 
gular habitations, according to their situation in 
life. To tbis class belong those who keep public- 
houses in Spain ; and othei'S in Transylvania and 
Hungary, whofollowsome regular business; which 
latter have their own miserable huts near Herman- 
ßtadt, Cronstadt, Bistritz, Gross waradein, Debre- 
zin, Eperres, Karchau, and other places. There 
are also many slaves, to particular bojars, in Mol- 
davia and Wallachia, who do not wander any more 
than the others. But by far the greatest number 
of these peqjle lead a very diiferent kind of life: 
ignorant of the comforts attending a fixed place of 
residence, they rove from one district to another in 
■ hordes, having no habitations but tents, holes in 
the rocks, or caves; tlie former shade them in sum- 
mer, rtie latter screen them in winter. Many of 
these savage people, particularly in Germany and 
Spain, do not even carry, tents with them, but 



i.vCoogIc 



52 

slielter themselves, from the heat of the sun, id 
forests shaded by the rocks, or behind hedges; 
they are very partial to willows, under which they 
erect their sleeping place, at the close of the 
evening. Some live in their tents (in their lan- 
guage called tschater) during both summer and 
winter; which indeed the Gipseys generally prefer. 
In Hungary, even those who have discontinued 
their rambling way of life, and built houses for 
themselves, seldom let a spring pass, without tak- 
ing advantage of the first settled weather, to set 
up a tent for their summer Tesidence ; under this 
each one enjoys himself, with his family, nor thinks 
of his house till the winter returns, and the frost 
and snow drive him back to it again. 

The wandering Gipsey, in Hungary and Tranr 
sylvania, endeavours to procure a horse; in Turkey, 
an ass serves to carry his wife, a couple of childi'en, 
with his tent. When he arrives at a place he likes, 
near a village or city, he unpacks, pitches his tent, 
ties his animal to a stake to graze, and remans 
some weeks there : or if he do not find his station 
convenient, he breaks up in a day or two, loads his 
beast, and looks out for a more agreeable situation, 
near some other town. Indeed, it is not always in 
his power to determine how long he will remain in 
the same place ; for the boors are apt to trouble him, 
«n account of fowls and geese he has made free 
with : it sometimes happens, ' when he is very 



:,. Google 



much at his ease, they sally but with hludgcons or 
hedge-stakes*, making» use of such forcible argu- 
ments, that he does not hesitate a moment to set 
up his staff a little farther off: though, in general, 
-the Gipseys are cunning enough, when they have 
purloined any thing, or done mischief, to make off 
in time before the villagers begin to suspect them. 
For their winter huts, they dig holes in the 
ground, ten or twelve feet deep ; the roof is com- 
posed of rafters laid across, which are covered with 
straw and sods : the stable, for the beast which 
carried the tent in summer, is a shed buÜt at the 
entrance of the hollow, and closed up with dung 
and straw. ' This shed, and a little opening rising 

■ above the roof of their . subterranean residence, to 
let out the smoke, are the only marks by which a 
traveller can distinguish their dwellings. Both in 
summ,er and winter, they contrive to have their 
habitation in the neighbourhood of some village, or 
city. Their favourite mode of building is against a 
hillock ; the holes in the level ground being only 

■ used in cases of necessity, when tliei-e is no ris- 
ing ground neai^ the spot they have chosen to pass 
the winter on. A Hungarian writer thus describes 
their method of constructing the second sort, of 
huts: "They first dig a hollow, about a fathom. 
*' broad, far enough into the hillock to bring their 
" floor on a level with the rest of the plain, in order 
•" to forrn a firm upright wall, for the back of the 



.Google 



"building. Into the wall they Rx a beam, about 
" sis feet from, and parallel to, the floor ; this 
" beam reaches as iar as the intended depth pf the 
" house, seldom exceeding seven or eight feet 
" One end being fast in the wall, the other rests 
" on, and is fixed to, a pillar or post driven into 
" the ground. When that is done, they lay boards, 
" balks, or such other wood as they can find, 
" against it on each side, in form of a pointed roof, 
" which, viewed from a distance, exhibits a front 
" in the shape of an equilateral triangle. The bu- 
" siness is finished by covering the whole building 
" with straw, sods, and earth, to secure its inha- 
" bitants from the rain, snow, and cold. They 
■" always contrive, when they can, to place their 
*' edifice so as to front either the rising or mid-day 
" sun ; this being the side where the opening is left 
" for a door to go in and out at, which is closed at 
" night, either with a coarse woollen cloth or a few 
" boards." 

Ini^nation will easily conceive how dismal and 
horrid the inside of such Gipsey huts must be to 
.civilised humanity. Air and daylight excluded, 
very darfip, and full of filth, they have more the 
appearance of wild beasts' dens, that of the habita- . 
tions of intelligent beings. Rooms or separate 
apartments are not even thought of; all is one open 
space : in the middle is the fire, serving both for the 
purpose of cooking and warmth; - the iather and 



jzvCooglc 



55 
mother lie half naked, the children entirely so, 
round it. Chairs, tables, beds or bedsteads, find 
no place here ; they sit, eat, sleep, on the bare 
ground, or at -most spread an old;_ blanket, or, in 
the Banat, a sheep-skin, under them. - Every fine 
day the door is set open for the sun to shine in, 
which they continue watching so long as it is 
above the horizon ; when the clay closes, they shut- 
their door and consign themselves over to rest. 
When the weather is cold, or the snow prevents 
them opening the door, they make up the fire, and 
sit round it till they fall asleep,' without any more 
light than it affords. 

The furniture and property of the Gipseys have 
been already described ; they consist of an eartlien ' 
pot, an iron pan, a spoon, a jug, and a knife; 
when it happens that every thing is complete, they 
sometimes add a dish : these serve for the wliole 
family. When the mascer of the house is a siajlb 
by_liade, as wilt be hereafter mentioned, he has a 
pair of bellows to blow up his fire, a small stone 
anvil, a pair of tongs, and p'erhaps a couplq of ham- 
mers; add to these a few old tatters in which he 
dresses himself, his knapsack, some pieces of torn 
bed-clothes, his tent, with- hia antiquated jadfe, 
and you have a complete catalogue of a nomadic 
Gipsey's estate. 

Very little can be said respecting the domestic 
employment of the women. Tlie care of their 



L;,.;,-z.d=,CoOglc 



S6 
children is th6 iiiost trifling concern : th^ neither 
wash, mend their clothes, nor clean their utensils : 
they seldom bake: the whole of their business, 
then, is reduced to— dressing their food and eat- 
ing it, smoking tobacco, prating, and sleeping. 
they continue during the whole winter in their 
hut; but at the first croaking of the frogs, they 
pull down their house, and decamp. 

, Such is the condition of the Gipseys who wander 
about in Hungary, Turkey, and other countries; 
being no-where, or rather every-where, at home. 
The reminder of these people who have reconciled 
themselves to a settled mode of living, ar« in much 
better circumstances, and inBnitely more rational, 
than those just described. It will be expected, 
that those Spanish Gipseys who are innkeepers, 
and entertain strangers, are more civilised ; and 
it abo holds good Mrith regard to those in Hungary 
and Transylvania who have different ways of 
gaining a livelihood. Their habitations are con- 
veniently divided into chambers ; and are furnished 
with tables, benches, decent kitchen furniture; 
and other necessaries. The few who farm, or 

^ breed cattle, have a plough and other implements 
of husbandry ; the others^ what is necessary for 
carrying on their trade ; though even here you are 
not to expect super6uity; habitaitions, clothes, 
every thing, indicate that their owners belong to 
the class of poor. They are very partim to gold 



i.vCoogIc 



37 

and silver plat^ particularly silver cups; which 
is a disposition they have in common with the 
wandering Gipseys: they let slip no opportunity 
of acquiring something of the kind J and will even 
starve themselves to procure it Though they 
seem little anxious to heap up riches for their 

' children, yet these frequently inherit a treasure 
of this sorC, and are obliged In their turn to pre- 
serve it as a sacred inheritance. The ordinary 
travelling Gipseys when in possession of such a 
piece of plate, commonly bury it under the-hearth 
of the» dwelling, in order to secure it. This 
inclination to deprive themselves of necessaries, 
that they may possess a superfluity, as well as 
many other of their customs, is curious, yet ap- 
pears tobe ancient; and it was probably inherent 

-in them when they were first seen by Europeans. 



.Google 



CHAPTER VII. 

—L Their Occupations and Trades. 

On considering the means to which the Gipseys 
have recourse to maintain themselves, we shall 
perceive the reason why poverty and want are so 
generally thdriot; namely, their excessive indo- 

..lence, and aversion from industry. They abhor 
every kind of emptoy^ient which is laborious or 
requires application; and had rather suffer even 
hunger and nakedness, than obviate these priva- 
tions on such hard terms. They therefore either 

' choose some profession which requires little exer- 
tion, allowing them many idle'hours; or addict 
themselves to unlawful courses, and vicious habits. 
1 Working in iron, is the most usual occupation 
of the Gipseys. In Spain, very few foltow any 
regular business; but. among these few, some are 
smiths : on the contrary, in Hungary this profes- 
sion is so common among them, that there is a 
proverb — 'So many Gipseys,- so many smiths:' 
the same might he said of those in Transylvaflia, 
WaUacbia, Moldavia, and ail Turkey in Europe ; 
at least such workers in fire are vety numerous in 
all ihose countries. This occupation seems to have 
been a favourite with them from the most distant 
periods, as appears not only by Bellonius's account^ 



i:,C00glc 



S9 

■ but by an older record, of an Hungarian' king 
Uladislaus, in tlie year 1496, nientione.tl by the 
lAbb^ fray, in his Annals, and Friedwaldsky, in 
his Mineralogy, wherein it is ordeied, that every 
efficer and subject, of whatever rank or condition, 
do allow to Thomas Polgar, kader of twenty-ßve 
tents of wandering Gipseys, Jree resiiknce every- 
tchere, and on no account to molest either him or his 
people ; became they had prepared 'musket bullets, 
and other military stores, jor the Bishop Sigismund, 
at Fiinjkirchen. Another instance occuiTed in the 
year 1565, when Mustapha, Turkish "regent of ' 
Bosnia, besieged Crupa; the Turks having ex- 
pended their powder and cannon balls, Gipseys 
were employed to make the latter, part of iron, the 
rest of stone ceased with lead. ' 
. The Gipseys of our time are not willing to un- 

dertake heavy work ; they seldom go beyond a 
pair of light horse-shoes ; in genera!, they con- 
fine themselves to small articles, such as rings, 
jews-harps, and small nails: they mend old pots 
and ~ kettles, make' knives,, seals, needles, and 
, sdtnetimes work trifles in tin or brass. 

Their^materials, tools, apparatus, all are bad, 
, and of the most inferior kind. Their common ' 

method of proceeding is, to collect some pieces 

* of rusty iron, old nails, broken horse-shoea, aod 

such-like, which they fuse and. shape to their 

/ purpose. The anvil ig a stone; th? other implß^ 



i:,C00glc 



40 
mcnts are, a pair of hand-bellows, a pair of pin- 
cers, a hammer, a vice, and a file : these are the 
tools which a nomadic Gipsey carries with him 
in his perambulations. Whenever he is disposed 
to work, he is at no loss for fuel : on his arrival 
at a station where he purposes remaining a few 
days, or perhaps weeks, he takes his beast, loads 
him with wood, builds a small kiln, and prepares 
his own coals. In favourable weather, his work 
is carried on in the open air ; when it is stormy, 
or the sun too powerful, he retires under his tent. 
He does not stand, but sits down on the ground, 
cross-legged, to his work ; which position is ren- 
dered necessary, not only by custom, but by the 
quality of his tools. The wife sits by to work the 
bellows, in which operation she is sometimes re- 
lieved by the elder children ; the little ones sit, 
. naked as they were born, round the fire. The 
Gipseys are generally praised for their dexterity 
and quickness, notwithstanding the wretched tools 
they have to operate with. When any piece of 
work requires much time to finish, they are apt ■ 
to lose their patience, and in that case become 
indifferent whether it be well execut^||>r not. 
They never submit to labour so long as they have 
got a dry crast, or any thing else to satisfy their 
hunger. They frequently receive orders to fabri- 
cate different articles ; but if not, no sooner are a 
few nails, or some other trifles, manufactured, than 



:,.;,i,z.d=,GoOgIc 



'man, woman, and children, dislodge, to convey 

their merchandise, from house to house, for sal^ 
in the neighbouring villages: th^ir traffick is 
carried on sometimes, for ready money, sometimes 
' by barter for eatables or other necessaries. 

Another branch of commerce much followed by j. 
'Hhe Gipseys is hors£_dealing, to which they seen) 
. to have been attached from the earliest period oi 
their history. In those parts of Hungary where 
the climate is so mild that horses may lie out all thf 
year, the Gipseys avail themselves of this circum- 
stance to breed, as well as deal in, those animals ; 
by which they sometimes not only procure a comper 
tence, but grow rich. Instances have been known 
. on the Continent of Gipseys keeping from fifty to 
seventy horses each, and those the best bred horse« 
of the country; some of which they let put fgr 
hire, others they sold or exchanged, as occasion 
offered. But this description of Gipsey horsie- 
dealers is not very num<^us i for the greatest 
number of them deal only in blind worn-PMt jade^ 
which they drive about to difierent markets, to 
sell or barter. When the dealer ia not fortunat« 
enough tofind a chap for his nag, he leads him to 
the colla^maker, who values the hid^ and takes 
him off his hands for a few groschen«. In order 
to prevent being reduced to this necessity, the 
slyest tricks are practised to conceal the ammar^ 
defect?. In Spain, therefore, Gitmo and Gitatierh 



:, Cookie 



42 
(Gipsey and Gipseyism) are become familiar ex- 
pressions to imply a cheater in horses, with the 
deceptions he makes use of. In the year 1727 
they had become so infamous in Sweden, that the 
subject was thought of sufficient concequence for 
the consideration of the .diet, and their total ex- 
pulsion was voted to be a necessary measure. 
The following trick is frequently played in Hun- 
gary, and the adjacent country, to make a horse 
appear brisk and active: — the rider alights at a 
small distance from the place where he means to 
offer his horse for sale, and, belabours him till he 
has put the whole muscular system in motion with 
fright; he then mounts again, and proceeds. The 
poor beast reiiienibering the blows he has received, 
jumps about, or sets out full speed, at the least ' 
signal ; the buyer, eutirely ignorant of the prepa- 
rattiry discipline the animal has undergone, sup- 
poiics this to be natural vivacity, and m hopes that 
good feeding, with care, will render him still more' 
lively, strikes a bargain : but the next day he has 
the' mortification to discover that he has bought a 
jade, on which* all his care will be thrown away, as 
" the beast has not a leg to stand upon. ^Ip Suabia, 
and on the Rhine, they have another device: — 
they make an jncj^ion in some hidden part of the 
s]cin, through which they blow the creature up, 
Uli he looks fleshy and plump; they then apply 
a Strong sticking-plaster, tq prevent the air from 

L, ,z,;i:,CÖOglc 



'returning. If what Wolfgang Franz assures us 
be true, they sometimes make use of a trick with a 
live eel, to this blown-up horse, that he may not 
only appear in good, condition, but spirited and 
lively. It might be thought, that, on account of 
these and such-like roguish proceedings, nobody 
would ever venture to deal with a Gipsey for a 
horse, were not the possibility proved by the 
fact itself But we see instances of this infatuation 
in other transactions : it is well known that every 
Jew will cheat, whenever he has an opportunity ; 
yet these people have lived by trade, ever since their 
dispersion from Babel. Then, these frauds do not 
always happen ; the Gipseys too sdl their horses 
cheap ; and as poor people cannot afford to- pay 
dear for them, they must buy where they can; 
and thus the Gipseys are enabled to continue their 
traffick. . 

To the two pn)fessions before mentioned as com- 
nionly followed by the men, may be added, those of 
> carpenters and turners : the former make watering- 
troughs and chests; ^ the latter turn trenchers, 
dishes, make spoons and other trifling articles, 
which they hawk about. There are others who 
make sieves, or maintain theiiiselves by cobbling 
shoes. Many of these, a» well as the blacksmiths 
and whitesmiths, find constant employment in the 
houses of the better sort of people, for whomThey, 
work the year round. They are not paid in 



i:,C00glc 



money.; but, beside other advantages, find a 
certain subsistence. Those who are not thus cir- 
cumstanced, do not wait at home foi' customers»^ 
but, with their implements in a sack thrown over 
their shoulders, seek business in the cities or 
villages: when any one calls, they throw down 
the bundle, and prepare the apparatus for work, 
before the door- of their employer. 
The Gipseys have a üxcd disHke to agriculture ; 
' and had rather suffer hunger, or any privation, 
than follow the plough, to eara a decent livelihood. 
But, as there is no general rule without an excep- 
tion, So, beside the staves to the bojars in Mol- 
davia and Wallachia, who are constrained to 
apply -to it, there are some in Hungary who are 
cultivators by choice. Since the year 1768, the 
Empress Theresa has commanded that the Hun- 
garian and Transylvaniaii Gipseys , should be in- 
structed in husbandry ; but these.orders have been 
very little regarded. At this time there are so few 
of them formers, in those parts, that they are un- 
deserving of notice ; tliough in Spain, and other 
European countries, they are still more scarce, as it 
would be difficult to find one who had ever made 
a furrow in his life. 

Formerly, Gipseys were commonly employed in 
Hungaiy, and in Transylvania almost universally, 
for hangmen and executioners. They still perform 
the business of flayers in Hungary, and of execu- 



i-, Google 



tioners in 'difTerent parts of Transj'lvaiiia. Their 
assiduity in torturiiig, their cruel invention in tor- 
menting, are described by Toppeltin to be so 
shocking, that the Gipseys seem eminently calcu- 
lated for works of barbarity. They do not follow 
flaying as a regular profession any-where; it is 
merely a casual occupation, in addition to their 
usual employment Whenever a beast dies near 
where they happen to be, it is a fortunate circum- 
stance if there be no skinner in the place ; not be- 
cause they can make much of the skin, which they- 
always leave with the owner for a trifling considera- 
, tion, but they are thus enabled to procure a plenti- 
ful provision of flesh for the family. 

Such are the employments of the men. We shall 
□ow proceed to shew the particular methods the wo- 
men have of obtaining support. It was formerly, 
and still is, the custom, among the wandering Gip- 
seys, especially in winter, not for the man to main- 
tain the wife, but the wife the husband. This is 
not precisely the fact in summer, when the men 
, have the before-vecited occupations ; nor among 
those who have a regular settlement; but the women 
always endeavour to contribute their share towards 
the maintainance of the family : some deal in old 
clothes ; others frequent brothels, which is com- 
monly the case in Spain, and still more so in Con- 
stantinople, and all over Turkey. There are others, 
in Constantinople, who make and sell brooms ; but 



i.vCoogIc 



46 
this trade is followed by those chiefly who are too 
old to get a livelihood by their debauchery. Danc- 
ing is anothefmeans they have of obtaining contri- 
butions: they generally practise this when begging, 
particularly of men, in the streets ; or when they 
enter houses, to ask charity. Their dancing is the 
moat disgusting that can be conceived, always end- 
ing with fulsome grimaces, or the most lascivious 
attitudes and gestures; nor is this indecency con- 
fined to the mapried women, but is rather more 
practised by young girls, travelling with their fa- 
thers, who are also musicians, and who, for a tri- 
fling acknowledgement, will exhibit their dexterity 
to any body who is pleased with these unseemly 
dances. They are trained up to this impudence 
from their earliest years, never suffering a passen- 
ger to pass their parents' hut, without endeavouring 
to obtain something by frisking about naked be- 
fore Wm. 

Respecting fortunetelling, with which the fe- 
male Gipseys impose on people's credulity, in every 
district and corner of Europe, little need he said. 
Yet it is extraordinary, that women, generally too 
pot till they become t>td, should be so sharpsighted 
as to discover, in every person's hand they are per- 
mitted to inspect, theevents of futurity! There are 
some instances of men being thus gifted; but so 
few, that they are only exceptions to a general rule^^ 
It is, therefore, to be ascribed to, the Gipsey wo- 



jzvGooglf 



■ men alone, that, faith in divination still exists ia 
the minds of millions of people. It is true, Europe 
was not originally beholden to the Gipseys for 
this faith, it being deeply rooted in the ignorance 
of the middle age, when they arrived and brought 
it with them also. The science of divination here, 
was already brought to a much greater degree of 
perfection than among them: rules were invented 
to tell lies from the inspection of the hand; where- 
as these poor wretches were esteemed mere bunglers.. 
During the seventeenth and beginning of the. 
eighteenth century the Gipseys were considered as, 
only a supernumerary party; tliere being men of 
great learning, who not only read lecture? in col- 
lege on' the divine art of chiromancy, but wrote 
many books, vilifying these people, and endeavour- 
ing to spoil their market by exposing their ignor- 
■ ance. But those enlightened men are no more;, 
their knowledge is deposited in the dead archives 
of literature: and probably, if there were no Gip- 
seys, with them would also have died the belief in 
chiromancy, as has happened in regard to astro- 
logy, necromancy, oneirocritica, and the other off- 
springs of imbecile fancy. By the Gipseys alone! 
will this deceit.be kept alive, till every Gipsey is 
constrained to acknowledge some country, and to 
have some ostensible mode of gaining a livelihood. 
\Ve can only pity the poor weak deluded beings, 
who pay their groschen or kreutzer,- their shilling 



i.Coogk- 



or sixpence for a few uiuneatung words! — as if it 
were possible for people to instruct us coDcerning 
our future fortune in life, who are ignorant of their 
own ; being unable to deteraiine whether a day or 
two hence, they may still be telling fortunes, or 
be taken before the ma^trates, and hanged for 
theft. 

In addition to the Chiromantie deception of the 
Gipsey women, they also — ^though not exclusively, 
as the men likewise often profess the same talent — - 
cure bewitched cattle, discover thefts, and possess 
nostrums of various kinds, to which they ascribe 
great virtues. These nostrums consist principally 

' of roots, and amulets made of unfermented dough, 
marked with strange figures; and dried in the air. 
Griselini says, that, in the Banat of Temeswar, 
they sell cert^n small stones, chiefly a kind of 
scoriae, which they say possess the quality of ren- 
dering the wearer foitunate in love, play, Sec.. 

■ Were that true, why deliver to others what they 
have so much occasion for themselves? Why do 
they beg and steal, when, with the assistance of . 
these stones, they might honourably acquire riches, 
and good fortune? Yet these stones are purchased 
with avidity, not only in the Banat, but in Ger- 
many. People use their quack medicines; call 
the Gipsey woman into the stable, to exorcise 
their bewitched cattle, without suspecting any 
trick or deception. So the open-hearted farmer. 



:, Google 



49 

in Suabia and Bavaria^ has recourse to the Gipsej^S 
bti many occasions, emplaying them as doctors for 
liian and beast; and constantly, in cases of sup- 
posed enchantment, flies to the Gipsey : this cir- 
cumstance happens most frequently among those ' 
of the common people who pretend to have the 
least belief in witches and witchcr;aft. Whenever 
a cow does, not feed kindly, something is immedi- 
ately suspected; and the Gipsey woman is called^ 
who is often so successful as to remove the impedi- 
ment. She goes into the stable, orders the cow to 
be shewn to her, and, after desiring every one else 
to go out, remans a few minutes alone with it : 
having finished her operations, she calls in the 
master, acquaints him with the beast's recovery, 
and behold it eats heartily! How happens this? 
Was it not a piece of enchantment, wherein the 
Gipsey really acted the magician ? Certainly not. 
The fraud is this : — When the cattle are feeding ; 
' abroad, the Gipsey woman takes advantage of the 
keeper's absence to entice some of Üiem, with a 
handful of fodder, to follow her; she then smear» 
them, over the nose and mouth, with some filthy 
composition, which she has ready in the other 
hand. From that moment, the creature loäths all 
kinds of food and drink. . When the Gipsey is 
called in to apply a remedy, the whole skill re- 
quired, is to cleanse the animalV nose and mouth 
from the stuff she had put on a day or two before: 



:,.;,l,z.d=,G00gIf 



by Ulis mtans the true smell is restored, ancl the 
cow being hungry, it is not surprising she shouM 
fall-to greedily. From this single instance, a 
judgment may be formed of other cases. 

The more common Gipsey occupations, wherein 
the men and women take an equal share, are — in 
Spain, keeping inns ; principally music in Hungary 
and Turkey; and gold-washing in Transylvania, 
tile Banat, Moldavia, and Wallachia. The Gip- 
seys, formerly, were concerned in smuggling ; and 
probably still are, although it is not mentioned by 
late writers. 

.Both male and female Gipseys attend at enter- 
tainments with their music, and ofteii shew great 
proficiency in the art : besides some wind iostru- 
inent, they have generally a violin; and many of 
them have attained so great perfection on that in- 
strument, as to be employed in the chapels of the 
nobility, and admired as great masters. Borna 
Mihalj/, in the country of Zips, who distinguished 
himself, about the middle of che last century, in 
the chapel of the cardinal Count Emerick xion 
Csckal^, was an Orpheus of this kind. The car- 
' dinal, who was a judge of music himself, had so 
great a regard for him, that he had his likeness 
taken by one of the most capital painters. In- 
stances of, the kind- are. not wanting in the other 
sex: it is well known that a Gipsey girl, at four- 
teen years of age, was so famous as a fidler, that 



i:,C00glc 



51 
the greatest and most fashionable people in Hun- 
gary were accustomed tn send twenty, or thirty 
miles for her, to play at their balls. There are 
likewise very many scrapers ; these are generally 
such as have leametl of other scrapers, at their 
own expense. This kind of musicians travel 
about, with the dancers before .mentiimed ; or play 
to the peasants, who, not having much tastey 
always make them welcome at their weddings, 

1 or dances. They scratch away on an old patched 
violinj or rumble on a broken base, neither caring 
about better instruments, nor minding to stop in 
tune; being what they are, more for want of 
application than capacity. Others practise vocal 
music; and some have acquired considerable for- 

. tunes, particularly in Spain, by singing. 

Goldwashin^, in the rivers, is another occupa- 
tion, by which many thousand Gipseys, of byth 
sexes, procure a livelihood, in the Banat, Tran- 
sylvania, Wallachia, and Moldavia. As this \s 
only a summer employment, they are under the 
necessity of finding some other means of support* 
ing themselves during the winter. It is not per- 
mitted for every one, without exception, to be a 
goldwasher: in Transylvania, such only can foll.ow 
the employment, who have leave from the office 
of Mons*; and these only enjoy the privilege under 

• the college of Mons wbs «iBblishcd in 1748. by the Em- 
press ThCTesa. In the sevi-nth arriclc of the Instructions gnuitedi 
(he Cipseyi vere allowed the privilege of vruhiag for gold. 



Si 
Gerten restrictions. I]^ Wallachia and Mtddavia, 
none of the bojars' slaves, thence called bojaresk 
(bojar Gipseys), are suffered to meddle with gold- 
cashing; that being a liberty granted only to 
those who, like other subjects, are immediately 
under the prince, denominated domnesk (princely 
Gipseys): which are also subdivided into three 
classes; the first named Äi«izr; the second ?7r*ffr; 
and the third Lajascken. The Rttdars alone have 
the licence above mentioned ; the others are obUged 
to seek a different means of obtaining 'support. 
Each person is forced to pay a certain tribute to 
government. The goldwashers in Transylvania 
and the Banat pay four guilders annually, which 
is discharged in gold-dust: the same sum is due 
from every Gipsey, though many evade l;he con- 
tribution. When the time for payment approaches, 
tiiey contrive to keep out of the way, particularly 
the Hungarian Gipseys. The tribute collected in 
Wallachia and Moldavia does not go into the 
public treasury, but (»elongs to the princesses for 
pin-money. In Cantemir's time, that in Mol- 
davia produced yearly one thousand six hundred 
drachms : and the consort of the Wallachian hos- 
podar Stephen Eakowitza, in the year 17^> re- 
ceived from her Rudars, two hundred aqd forty in 
number, twelve hundred and.fiftyfour drachms;-»- 
a sum, according to General von Bauer an^ Sulzer^ 
amountiog to m^ thousand and three drachms, 



:,.;,i,z^b,CoO^Ic 



Bht gold. What The GipseyS in Wallachia and 
Afoldavia get more than their head-money, goes 
to the grand armasch, at two lion-guilders the 
drachm : this he afterwards sells again, at b. higher 
price, according with its real valub; as General 
■ Von Bauer believes, fbt his own profit, not for. that 
t>f the pnnde. The gnldwashers-iti the Bbnat and 
Transylvania dispose of their share at the royal 
redemption- oiHce, in Zälatnya. The earnings <^ 
Öiese people vary with timeand-al different places; 
during heavy rains and floods they are usually 
stiost successful : besides, their profit is more ot 
less, according to the quality of the- river they 
wash in. At the most favourable times, viz. at - 
the floods, Griselini calculates- their daily gain not 
to exceed three groschens. If we iinderatand, as 
we certainly ought, that this sum is not earned by 
each person, but by a whole family, the state- 
ment will agree, pretty nearly, with Mr. Demb- 
scher's account: he says, " Id the year 1770 
" tiiere were, in the districts of Uj-Palanka, 
" Orsova, and Caransebcs, upwards of eighty 
*' goldwashers,. all of 'whom had families, and 
" fotlowcd the busineJs, with tlieir w'ivea and 
"children; yet this ndmbcr of hands delivered 
" in Only six or seven hundred ^cats worth of 
" gold." Take half of the doubtful seventh hun- 
dred ; deduct three hundred and twenty guilders^ 
head money, from the gross sam; divide th» re- 



i.vCoogIc 



, niainder among cigh^- families, and each will 
receive yearly thirty-two guilders: allot to each 
day, in the summer half-year,, its proportion, and 
it will be found very little more or less than three 
groschens. As before stated, the labour of two 
hundred Rudars produced, in the year 1764, 
twelve hundred fifty-four drachms : General von 
Bauer adds, this sum was exactly the half of what 
Was collected, over the whole country, in the same 
year. Now as these Gipseys were under the 
necessity of parting with their twelve or thirteen 
hundred drachms, which remaned after the capitar 
tion tax was paid, to the grand-armasch, at the 
rate of two lion-guilders per drachm, they earned 
still less than those in the Banat; although the 
rivers in Wallachia contain a sufficient plenty of 
gold to have enabled them to make ten times that 
advantage, did not their laziness prevent them. 
The TransyK-anian rivers yield the most gold : there 
are annually, from eight to ten hundred weight 
separated from their sand, which are brought to 
Zalatnya, to be disposed of. As this quantity 
is not obtained by Gipseys only, but together with 
the Wallachians, and we have no account of the 
gross number of goldwashers, how many of them 
are Gipseys, nor what proportion they have of 
these eight hundred weight, it is impossible to 
ascertain the profits of the Traosylvanian Gipsey 
goldwasheri. That they are better off than those, 



i:,C00glc 



SS 
ia the Banat and other places, is certain, from the 
circumstance of the .rivers abounding more with 
gold, than elsewhere. 

It may not be uninteresting in this place to 
give the process of goldwashing, in -the words of 
those who, as mineralt^ists, have superintended 
the work. , The account communicated by the 
Councellor von Kotzian, concerning the goldwash- 
ing in the Banat, is as follows : " The operation 
" consists in, first, providing a board of lime-wood, . 
" about one fathom long, and half a fathom broad ; 
" being hollowed at the upper end, in the form' of 
"a dish, from'which are cut ten or twelve chan-. 
" nels, in an oblique direction. This board is 
" fixed in an incÜned position so as to form an . 
" ahgle of forty-five degrees with the horizon. 
" The sand containing the gold, being laid in the 
" hollow at the top of the board, a quantity of 
" water, is then poured upon it, which carries off , 
" the lighter parts; such as are more heavy they 
" shove down by hand : what remains in the 
"channels, or furrows, is discharged into an ob^ 
" long tfay, carried to the straining-trough, and 
" the gold which remains picked clean out. The 
** whole of this work is perfonned in so careless a 
*' manner, that much pure gold is lost ; it is, 
<' moreover, to be lannented^ that the Gipseys get 
'* only the gold which is perfectly separated from 
*' the sand, but by no means any tliat sticks to 



i":, Google 



5« 
" the ore, which they throw away, ^lougH Öier* 
" is gold in it." 

As it seems evident, from the foregoing state- 
ment, that this method is very inadequate t» the 
purpose, uid that consequently much gold must 
be wasted, we are the more surprised when another' 
author» in the following words, assures us of the 
contrary : — '* So negligent aijd careless as the work 
" of the Gipseys appears at first sight, just as- 
*' eflfectual it is proved when put to the test. Daily 
"■practice gives to these people a d^ee of di»- 
"cernment, without which another person would' 
*' think they must Jose a. great deal. I convinced' 
*' myself in the following manner : When they had 
**finished their washing on the boards— for which 
** they commonly used from fifteen to twenty 
^*: troughs of coarse ^tuflT — I divided the washed 
^' stuff into three parcels; the ten or fifteen upper- 
*' most furrows always contained: the most gold^. ■ 
** the second division not more thanan eighth part 
■* as much, but the last fifteen to twenty fün-ows 
f* scarcely three grains. I have also narrowly 
" examined the refuse, aod very seldom found any 
** traces of gold in it;" 

The art of goldwashii^ is brought to much 
greater perfection ki Transylvania. In the descrip-, 
tioQ of .the process adopted in that country, 
it is said that all the rivers, brooks» and even the 
pools which the faul iotrna, produce ^Id; 



:, Cobble 



of these the river Aranyosch is the richest, in- 
somuch that the historians have compared it 
to the Tägüs and Pactolua. Excepting the 
Wallachiaos, who live by the rivers, the gold- 
washers consist chiefly of Gipseys. 'they can 
judgewith the greatest certitude where to wash to 
advantage. The apparatus used by therti for thi» 
work is a crooked board, foar or üve' feet long, 
by two of three broad, generally provided with 
a wooden rim on each side; over this board they 
spread a woollen cloth, and scatter the gold-sand, 
mixed with water, upon it : the smalt grains of the 
metal remain sticking to the cloth, which they 
afterwards wash in a vessel of water, and then 
sep^te the gold by moans of the trough. When 
larger particles of saod are found in their washing, 
they make deeper channels in the middle of their 
crooked boards, to stop the sinall pieces as they 
roll down : they closely examine these smaH stone^ 
and some are frequently found to have solid gold 
fixed in them. 

Those we have mentioned are the cifttoiwary* 
professions and occupations of Gipseys, in the' 
different countries and states of Europe. But T 
people must not imagine that their smiths' ahops' 
aj*e' continually resounding with the hammer; nor 
that those of other professions are so attenrive - to 
their callings, as to provide even a daily sub- 
. sistence, not to think of a comfortable niainten'« 



i:,Googlc 



ance. Their consummate laziness, on the contrary, 
as before ubbewed, occasions so niRny idle hour» 
in the day, that their family is often reduced to the 
greatest distress; for which reason, begging or 
stealing is by far a more common method, than 
diligence or assiduous application to business, for 
quieting the cravings of hunger. If we except " 
soldiers, who are kept in order hy the iliscipline of 
the corporal, with some of the Transylvanian gold- 

' washers, who apply to music— ^and, living separate 
from their own caste, in constant hi.bits of inter- 

. course with people of a iwtier'sort, have thereby 
acijuived »loie civilised manners, and learned the 
distinction, if not between riglit and wrong, at 
least between social honour and disgrace — the re- 
niainder are, in the most .unlimited sense, arrant 
tliieves. In iact, working at any trade, or employ- 
ment, seems to he merely a disguise, in order the 
better to enable them to carry on' their thieving 
practices ; as the articles which they prepare for sale 
in the cities and villages, furnish an excellent 
excuse for sneaking into house:«, to pry where 
there is any thing which they may appropriate to 
themselves. This kind of artifice is particularly the 
province of the women; who have always been 
reckoned more dextrous than the men in the art 
of stealing. They commonly take children with 
them, who are tutored , to remain behind, in the 
outer part of the housej to purloin what they cav, 



i:,C00glc 



59 
while tW mother is negociating in the chamber. 
It is generally the women's office to make away 
with the boor's geese and fowis, when they are to 
be found ia a convenient place. Should the crea^ 
ture make a noise when seized, it is killed and 
dressed for the consumption of the family; but if, 
by chance, it have strayed so far from the village 
that its crying cannot give< any alarm, they keep 
it alive to sell at the next market town. Winter 
is the time when the women, generally we mojt 
called upon to try their skill in this way: duritig 
that season, many of the men remain in their hats, 
sending the women abroad to forage. They go 
about in the guise of beggars — a character they 
well know how to support — ^and commonly carry 
with them a couple of children, miserably exposed to 
the cold and frost ; one of these is led by the hand, 
tlie other tied in a cloth to the woman's back, in 
order to excite compassion in well-disposed people: 
Whole troops of these Gipsey beggars are met 
with in Spain ; and the encounter is by no means 
pleasant, as they ask alms in a manner, and with 
such importunity, as if they thought you could 
not deny them. They also tell fortunes; and 
impose on the credulous with amulets. Besides 
all this, they seldom return to their husbands 
without some pilfered booty. Many writers con- 
fine the thefts of the Gipseys to small maters, and 
will not allow that they are ever guilty of violence. 



:,.;,l,ZDd'byG00gIC 



60 
This is. not only dented by the testimony of otliet^ 
but absoltttely contradioted by some recent in- 
stances; It is true that^ On account of their natural 
timidity, they do hesitate to commit a robbery 
which appears to be attended with great' danger, 
nor do they often break open houses by night : they 
rather confine themselves to petty depredations, 
than, as they think, rush voluntarily into destruc- 
tion by a great and dangerous action. Yet we 
have more than one proof, that they make no 
scruple to murder a traveller, or plunder cities and 
viy&ges. 



:,C00gfc 



61 

CHAPTER VIII. 

On their Marriages and Education. 

There are not, perhaps, any other peoplramong: 
whom marriages are contracted withs» little consi- 
deration, or solemnised with so little ceremony-, as' 
among the Gipseys. No sooner has a boy attained 
the age' of tburteen or fifteen years, than he begins 
to perceive that something more than mere eating 
and drinking is necessary to him. Uavitig no fear ' 
of con^quences, nor being, under any restraint, ' 
fVom his parents, he forms a cönpection with the: 
giri he most fancies, of twelve, or at most thirteeiv 
years old, withoutany scruple of conscience, whci- 
ther she be his nearest relation, or an entire stranger ;. 
but it is to be observed, that a Gripsey never mai^ 
ries a person who is n<^of the true Gipaey breed: 
God's commandments' are. unknown to htm ; and. 
^uman laws cannot have much; influence over ona^ 
who lives in a desert, remote from the observation- 
of any ruling power. Theterm of courtship is very 
short, often only long enough for the parties to 
commumcate ■ their mutual- inclination. They, do 
not wait foraiiy-marriageoeremony^. as.it i&a mat" 
tcr of no consequence' to> them, whether it' be per« 
formed afterwards, or not at all: Yet they do not' 
seem to be entirety- in^äierfet about matrinKmy^ 



i:;Cooglc 



; ; ■ ÖS 

not on account of conforming to any institution, 
but from a piide they have in imitating what is done 
by other people, lest they should appear to be in- 
ferior to them. As the very early age, of the parties, 
or some otlier irregularity, might meet with objec- 
tions from a regular clergyman, they frequently get 
one of their own people to act the priest, and tack 
the decent couple together. A maniage being thus 
accomplished, the man provides a stone for an anvil, 

i a pair of pincets, a file, and hammers away as a 
smith; or works at some other trade, he may haveju&t - 
learned from his father : then begins his peregrina- 
tion. Should his wife conunit a fault at a future 
time, he gives her half a dozen boxes on the ear ; 
or very likely, for some trifling cause, turns her off 
entirely. Her conduct must, in general, be very 
much regulated by his will ; and she is obliged to 
be more attentive to him than te herself When 
the woman lies-in, . which happens frequently, these 
people being remarkably proUfic, the child is 
brought forth, either in their miserable hut, or, 
according to circumstances, it may be in the open 

, ar, but always easily and fortunately : a woman of; 
the same kind performs the office of midwife. 
True Gipsey hke, for want of some vessel, they dig 
a hole in the ground, which is filled up with cold 
water, and the new-bom child washed in it. This 
being done, it is wrapped up in some old rags, 
which the motherly foresight has (aken care to pro- 



, Cookie 



63 . 

vide. Next comes the christening, at which cere- 
mony they prefer strangers, for witnesses, rather 
than their own caste : but what kind of folks their 
guests arc, may be collected from the mode of en- 
tertaining them. When the christening is over, 
the &ther takes the sponsors to an alehouse, -or if 
none be near, to some other house, where he treats 
\ them with cakes and brandy. If he is a little above ' 
the lowest state of misery, and has a mind to be 
generous, other things are provided ; but he does 

/not join the company, being employed in serving 
his guests. Thus the affair ends.. The lying-in 
woman passes her short time of confinement, sel- 

) dom exceeding eight days, with her child, in. the 
hut, or under a tent, in the smoke by the fire. 
Refreshments are often sent from the godfathers 
and godmothers ; yet they are sometimes so un- 
civil, that they do not hesitate to quarrel with them 
or even to discharge tliem from the trust, if they 
think the present too small, or do not like the provi- 
sions. When this ■ happens, they have another 
christening, in some other place; nay, sometimes 
even a third. 

Gipsey women, as already mentioned, frequently . 
smear- their children over with a particular kind of 
ointment, and then lay them in the sun, or before 
the fire, in order that the skin may be more com- 
pletely parched, and their black beauty thereby 
increased. They never use a cradle, nor even 



:, Google 



7 



6« 

j -possets such a piece of furniture; the child deeps 
J JD its mother's arms, or on the gnHmd. When the 
lying-ill is over, the Gipsey woman goes to church, 
and thence, immediately, ather to beging or 
steading. White the child remains in her arms, 
perhaps imagining that people wilt be less severe' 
in their chastisements, she is more rapacious than 
at other times, and takes whatever she can lay her 
hands on. If she cannot escape without a beating 
she endeavours to screen herself by holding up the 
child to receive the blows, tilt she finds an op- 
portunity of retiring imperceptibly, and nitming 
away. 

When the chi^d gets a little stronger, and htt 
attained the age of three or fbur months, the mo- 
ther seldom carries it on the arm, but aH|ier back; 
there it sits, winter and summer, in a linen ra^ 
with its head over her shoulder. If she have more 
children, in course of time, which is generally the 
case, as this race of beings is so prolifick, she leads 
one or two by the hand, while such as are older 
run by her side ; and thus attended, she strolls 
through the villages and into houses. Kotwith- 
standing their dark complexion, and bad nursing, 
writers are unanimous in stating, that these child- 
ren are good-looking, well shaped, lively, clever, 
and have fine eyes. The mother plaits their black 
hair on the ctown of the head, partly to keep it 
out of their face^, and partly for ornament. This 



i:,C00gIC 



65 

ii ^1 she ever does tovards doeontmg herofibpriog; 
£br in uimmer (he children wear no clothe« tiU tea !i. 
■ years of age, and in winter they are forced to be 
content with a few old rags hung about them. 

No sooner is the child, whether boy or giri, ca- 
pable of running about, &aii it is taught to dance; ., 
vfaich talent consists in jumping cm one foot, and 
constantly striking behind with the other, As the 
young Gipsey grows up, all kinds of postures ire 
added, in hopes of diverting, and thereby to ob- 
taio % reward from peraons who happea to pass the 
poreots' habitation. What the children are further 
btught, especially by their mothers, is the art^of 
•tealjng, Avhich tliey often put in practice, as be- 
fore related. Instruction or school is never thought ' 
of; nor do they learn any bujliaes«, except perhapf ' 
to blow the are when the father forges, or to assist - 
in gotdwashing. 

Py the twelfth or thirteenth yea^ a boy acquires a_ . 
some knowled^ of his fether's trade ; and tlien be- 
copjes eimincipated from parental authority ; as he 
aow begins to think of forming his. own separate 
connectioiw. The Gipseys, in cqmmon with uoci- 
vUised people, entertain unbounded love for thnr 
children: this is a source of the most unpardonable 
neg\etit- . Gipaey children never feel the rod ; they 
$y ipto the most violent passion, and at the same 
tiine hear nothing from their parents but flattery 
and coaxing. In return, they act^ asiscommonly 



:,.;,l,ZDdbyG00gIt: 



the consequence of such education, with the great- 
est ingratitude. This excessive fondness for their 
children ts, however, attended with one advantage : 
— when they are indebted to any person, which is 
frequently the case in Hungary and Transylvania, 
the creditor seizes a child, and by that means ob- 
tains a settlement of his demand ; as the Gipsey 
will immediately -exert every method to dischai^ 
the debt, and procure the release of his darUng 
(Spring. 

To the befbregoing account of Gipsey marriages« 
and education, there are but few exceptions; com- 
prised in a small proportion of them who have fixed 
habitations. The character of people being formed 
by the instruction they receive in their early years» 
can it then be thought surprising that Gipseys 
should be idlers, thieves, murderers, and incendia- 
ries ? Is it probable, that man should become di- 
ligent, who has been educated. in laziness.? Can it 
be expected those should leave every person in pos- 
, session of his own property, whose father and mo- 
ther have taught them to steal, from their earliest 
infancy? Who can have a general idea of fair deal- 
ing, that knows not rig-ht from wrong, nor has ever 
learned the distinction between good and evil, vir- 
tue and vice? Punishments inflicted on others, 
for their crimes, have üo effect upon one who, is 
not sufficiently attentive to take warning by the 
examples of strangers: and when, by his own ex- 



i.vCooglc. 



perience> he U taught not to lay hands on äie pro- 
perty of others, he is become so hardened, that 
the mjider punishments leave no tasting impression ; 
vrhile the- mote severe ones, which reach the tif^ 
cannot have any effect on him, and are, as hefore ob- 
Sierved, totally disregarded by his fellows. So long 
therefore as theeducatim of the Gipses, conti-' I 
nues to be what it is, we cannot hope -that they. : 
should leave off their vide practices and filthy habits. 



,Coo^^k 



CHIPTEE tX. 

On ikar I^Uiesi, tkaih, äüj JSuriaL 

Wf have b^Rfte had dcicalikni to mention Üü con- 
iikAt gböd h^lth of Üitat people ; aad it iff fact^ 
äiät they do injoy it nAote uninterraptedly, and 
{lerfbctjy, than i>erBbns of the moat regular babitft, 
and ^bo pay the greatest attention to themselves. 
They get no cold nor deffuxions, from the incle- 
mency of the ur. They are not subject to rashes ; 
even poisons, or epidemical' disorders, have no effect 
upon thero. Any prevailing sickness penetrates 
Sooner into ten habitations of civilised people, than 
it Bnds iU Way under a Gipsey's tent, or into his 
hut They are equally liable to the small-pox and 
measles with other people, though with infinitely 
less danger ; and they are subject to a disorder in 
'' ihe eyes, occasioned by the continual »moke and . 
steam in their huts, during the winter season : ex- 
cepting these complunts, the Gipseys, in general, 
experience little inconvenience till the time come» 
that Nature demands her own back agun, and eia- 
tirely destroys the machine. Though tins be not 
always at a great age, it is generally at aa advanced 
' period ;■ it being very uncommon for a Gipsey to 
die early in life, or during his childhood. Their 
love of life is excessive; yet they hardly ever take 



/.'^/^ 



, Google 



the advice of a physician, or use medidues, even iti, 
the moat dangerous maladies. They generatly 
/ leave every tiling to nature, or good fortune: i£ 
. they^ doanjf thing, it is, to mix a little saffron ia 
their soup, or bleed and scarify themselves ; having 
observed that their horses use bleeding, as a remedy 
for disorders. When the sickness indicates danger, 
and that the universal enemy to life is really in 
earnest, the Gipsey breaks out into sighs and la- 
mentations, on actxHint of his departure; tillatlas^ 
he gives up the ghost, in his usual place of resid- 
ence — under a tree, or in his tent. 

The preparations for death are usually r^utated 
according to a person's religious principles ; but the 
Gipsey, who neither knows nor believes uiy thing 
concerning the immortati^ of the soul, or of re- 
, wards and punishments beyond this life, for the 
most part dies like a beast — ignorant of himself an4 
his Creator, as well as utterly incapable of fi^rminjiE 
any opinion respecting a higher destination. 

The Oipsey's decease is instantly succeeded by- 
ihe most frantic lamentations: parents, in par* 
ticular, who 'have lost their children, appear in^ 
eonsolablc. Little can be siud of their bifri^lsj 
only, that on those occasions the cries and be- 
wailings are redoubled, and become very violpi^t. 
When the leader of a horde die^ things are con- 
ducted more quietly. Bi» otra people cany hi«). 



i.LiOogIc 



70 
with gteat re§pect, to the grave, where each one 
appeafa earaest and attentive; althoughat the same 
time employed in a manner to excite laughter. - 

This is the mode of proceeding when a Gipsey 
dies a natural death. But it oflen happens that he 
loses his life .by violent means — not, by his own 
hands for self-murder and-infenticide are equally 
unheard of among them. . No Gipsey ever puts a 
period to his o\vn existence on account of vexation, 
anxiety, or despwr; as, besides his unbounded 
love of life, care or despair is totally unknown 
to him. 
( Even in the greatest distress, the Gipsey is never 

y troubled with low spirits ; }ever merry and Wythe, 
he dies not till he cannot help it : this often happens - 
on the gallows, attended with scenes ridiculous as 
the most ludicrous imagination could invent One 
sian requested, as a particular act of grace, that 
be might not be hanged with his fitce towards the 
high road ; saying, " Many of his acquaintance 
** passed that way, and he should be very much 
" ashamed to be seen by them hanging on a gal- 
" lows." At another time the relations of a Gipsey 
who was leading to execution,' perceiving, by the 
discourse and gestures of the 'criminal, how. un^ 
willingly he advanced, not having the least inclina- 
tion to be hanged, addressed themselv» to the 

' mag^trates and officers of justice, with the follaw- 



:, Google 



71 

ing wise remonstrance ; " Gentlemen, pray do 
" not compel a man to a thing for which you see 
" he has no desire nor inclination." Such scenes 
happen at almost every Gipsey execution, which 
are proofs 'that these {>e<^le are quite deficient in. 
thought or consideration. 



., ,.;;i .Cookie 



CHAPTEE X. 

Political Regulation pecuUar to the Gipstet. 

When the Gipscys first arrived in Europe, they 
had leaders and chiefs, txt conduct the various 
tribes in their migrations. This was necessary, 
not only to facilitate their progress through different 
countries and quarters of the globe, but to unite 
their force if necessary, and thereby enable them 
to make a more fonnidable resistance when op* 
posed; and likewise to carry any plan, they mi,i;hfe 
have formed, m^re readily into execution. We 
accordingly find, in old books, mention made of 
knights, counts, dukes, and kings. Krantz and 
Munster mention coimts, and knights, in gene* 
ral terms, among the Gipsevs; other people give 
us the very names of these dignified men : Crusius 
cites a duke Michael; Muratori a duke Air- 
SBEAs; and Aventinus records a king Zindelo; 
not to speak of inscriptions on monuments, erected 
in different places, to the memories of duke Panvei, 
count Johann is; and a noble knight Petrus, ia 
the fifteenth century. But no comment is requisite^ 
to shew bow improperly these appellations were 
applied. Though the Gipsey chiefs might be gJa* 
tified with these titles, and their dependants pro^ 
bably esteemed them people of lank, it was oierely 



:, Google 



-73 
^ rujkulous imitation of whfit thjey h^secn an^ ' 
admired among civilised people- .Nevertheless 
.'^le custpm of having .l^a^ei^ and, chiefs oyer the^ 
prevails to tjiis tim^ . ftt least jp H ungary ap^-^ 
pTr ansylv ania; pTObaljily it m^y .^Ipo s^ill esls* in 
ywr^e y. and oth^r ppuntries iw,^()^ ^IfF;^ |ii;pt^ 
.live tqget|ifr.in,^e^t,n^^|}er3< . 

T^^yc phiefs— ;pr wjggjjdes, as thpy proujlly 
call' tiiem— wereib^ffierly ,pf ,t(VQ ^egi;^a ,in Hua,- 
-gaty. E^hp^tty!tri)»e,h«^ itsQ wajead cr^; ^ß}^ -^ 
jvhicb, )tlm« w^i«,f!:jpr;5upgri9rj?ay'*i(od9s, of thejr 
.qWD cast?, ,on ,bpth ..sid^ ,t]l^ P,^i()?p ,^n^ X^W^» 
.vrhpse ^s^al re?^^nc?s .wjiftP ,-?t V^, , If^^p^, 
Szathowr,. and ^(%i,: .,P ^tl)«?« .i#,,?p»?lllf 
waywodes were accqiip^^te. . ^It ^vfßi^l^ jSj^^i^ 
extr^rdinary that aqy .^/^l^TF^^ate^ ft^,^^Vi 
„allow th^e people a dift^nf;t,qs^hlis]i]:^9i)tjQ^fj}e 
he^ofit^e country, did.rijit^fhe,H»f^jg%rijip Tpljfi^ 
assign a rea^p : yif. ^t^t, ja tjie q;^m9^8 ß^ 
, troubles, o^^caaion^ hy the. Tpi;ki^ ,^^^rs, tPifff^ 
-mer centuries,, (;^iey,>vefö, hy,fl;i^s of ,t^^ >j^j- 
.wodes, more .ftaai^y ^\xfnp:lf>^^6, ^^fl gS^i^n 
-required, and rende^l yseful i^o .Ü^e|.p^jp^yjij[jii^. 
But the Gtpseyi^ i^ , JIupgary;imdjTraii43f|v«^W* ^,e^ 
j permitted. tjo chppsf, . f^ppi their o>^fl_p^plc,,.on|y 
thea)p[iaU waywod^! of -,each fnjbe. -^^e^^ugt^mt ■ 
.ffaywod^s, to ..whppijtlfe .G^jWys, „in n^^y „d^s- 
. tfict^, _f»Pre, 8ubjevt,,iaye . t;xi»,teA 1^ .^wi^n^a^ f^w 
'y«««;/bHt,rti?y,i¥f^c ijpppJ£ü;j:4,by,f]l^Fsi^ ^* 



i.vCoogIc 



74 
alirays selected fiotii the Hungarian nobtiity* 
The appointment was by no meass despicable; 
as each Gipsey waa bound to pay the superintend- 
ent under whom his tribe was classed, a guilder 
- annually, of whicl} one half was demanded at 
Easter, the other half at Michaelmas. In order 
to render the levying this tax more certain, the 
magistrates, in all towns, cities, and villages, 
were ordered to be assisting to the coHectori, 
where necessarj' ; to protect them 'also from any 
violence that might be offered by the GSpseys. 
These superior waywodes are now no longer ap- 
^ jCointcd, except a single one in Transylvania, who 
"has authority -over the goldwashers in those parts. 
But the Gipseys still continue the custom, among 
'themselves, of dignifying certain persons, whom 
"they make' heads over them,~ and' call by the ex- 
, alted Sclavonian title — way wode. To choose 
• their waywodc, theOipseys take the opportunity 
. when a great number of thein are assembled in 
'one place, commonly in the open field. The 
elected person is lifted up three times, amidst the 
loudest acclamatioos, and confirmed in his dignity 
■ by presents ; his wife undergoes the same cere- 
■mony. When this solemnity is performed, they 
" «parate with great conceit, imagining themselves 
" people of more comequencethan electors returning 
. irom the choice of an emperor. . "Every one who 
43 -of a family descended irom a ibnner waywod» 



i:,Googlc 



75 
is eligible; -but "those who are best clothed, not 
very poor, of large stature, and about the middle 
age, have generally -the preference. Understand- 
ing' or wise conduct is of no consideration : there- 
fore it is easy to distinguish the i^aywode from y 
the multitude, by observing his size and clothing; 
The particular distinguishing mark of dignity, is 
a large Whip, hanging over the shoulder. His 
outward deportment, his walk and air, also plainly 
shew his head to be filled with notions of au-. 
thority. 

It is uncertain, hqw ftr the waywdde's sway over 
his subjects extends. A distinction must here be 
made, whether the state ^ves him any power, 
and what he assumes or derives by custom, from 

'his caste. It were ridiculous to suppose that the 
stafe should, on any occasion, appoint this sort of 
illustrious personage a judge. In Transylvania, 
indeed, the magistrates do interfere with regard 
to the fellow whom this or that horde has elected 
chief, and impose an obligation on him ; but it 
is ouly that he should be careful to prevent his 

.nimble subjects from absconding, when the time . 
arrives for them to discharge their annual tribute 
at the land-regent's chamber. He has no right to 

■ interfere in disputes or quarrels which the Gipscys 
have among themselves, or with otlier people, 
further than to give notice of them to the regular 
courts of the district where, they happen to be. 



i:,C00glc 



Id this point of view, what Toppeltm .and otben 
aftcf him assert, that the way wodes have lUtle or 
no power over their own people, is perf<^tly cor*- 
<,jvct: but if we attend to their actions, the afiätr 
(carries a very different appearance. Whenever a 
compluQt is made, that any of their people have 
i>een guilty of theft, the waywode not only orders 
A general search to be made, in every tent or hu^ 
and retunis the sto]en goods to the owner, if they 
\caa. be found, but punishes the thief, in presence 
'', of the complünant, with his whip. Certainly it 
is not by any written contract that he acquires 
his right over the people^ for no such thing exists, 
ftmong them, but custom gives him .this judicial 
.power. - Moreover he does not punish the aggressor 
from any regard to justice, but rather to quiet the 
:plaintiff, and at the same time to make his people 
more waiy in their thefts, as well as more dejctrous 
lin concealing their plunder. These disboveries 
<inaterially concern him, since by every detection 
his income suffers; as the whole profit of his office. 
arises from his sbire of the articles that are stolen. 
Every rime a Gipsey brings in a booty, he is 
'Obliged to give in|(>rmatioa to tlie arch-Gipsey of 
his successful enterprise ; aad then render a j,ust 
account of what and how much he has stolen» 
ia order that the proper division may be made. 
In this proceeding the Gipsey considers himself. 
bound to give A fair and mie detail ;. tho^gjtt ia 



i:,Coogli:' 



every other instance he does not hesitate to commit 
the grossest perjury. We may therefore judge 
how precarious success is likely to be, when a 
waywode is applied to for the recoveiy of stolen 
goods. The Gipseys are curming enough to hide 
what they have pilfered, in such a manner, that 
out of a hundred searches the complüner hardly 
once accomplishes his desire, tt' does not at all 
forward the cause, that the waywode knows who 
the thief is : his interest requires him to dissemble. - 
Thus, though he does not steal himself, the Span* 
ish proverb is a very true one: " IW Count and 
the.Gipsey are rogues alike." For which reason 
people seldom apply to so suspicious a judge. If 
a thief is caught in the fact, the owner takes his 
property, and gives the offender his proper reward, 
or else delivers him over to the civil power for 
correction. Here ensues a truly laughable scene : 
As soon as the ofBcer seizes on, and forces away 
the culprit, he is surrounded by a swarm of 
Gipseys, who take unspeakable pains to procure 
the release of the prisoner. They endeavour to 
öajole him with kind words, desiring him to con- 
sider this, that, and the other, or admonish him 
not to be so uncivil. When it comes to the 
infliction of punishment, and the malefactor re-r 
ceives a good number of lashes, well laid on, in ' 
the public market-place, an universal lamentation 
commences among the vile *rewj each stretcher 



i:,C00glc 



78 
bis throaty to ciy over the agony his dear associate 
is construned to sufTet. This is oftener the fate 
of the woTgaLthan of the men; for, aa the main- 
tenancQ : of the family depends most upon tbem, 
they more frequently go out for plunder. 



i:,C00glc 



CHAPTER XI. 

On the Religion of the Gtpseys. 
These people did not bring aoy particular religion 
/ with them from their native country, by which,» 
' as the Jews, they could be distinguished among 
other persoDs ; but regulate themselves, in religioui 
matterai.accej:ding to the country where they live. 
Being very inconstant in their choice of j-esidence, 
they are likewise so in respect to religion. No 
; Cipsey has an* idea of submission to any fixed pro-' 
fession of faith : it is as easy for him to jchange his 
^ i religion at every new village, as.for another person 
to shift hiscoat. They suffer themselves to be bap- 
tised in Christian countries; among Mahometans 
to be circumcised. They are Greeks with Greeks, 
Catholics with Catholics, and again profess' them- 
selves to be Protestants, whenever they happen 
to reside where protestantism prevails. 

Fr*m this mutability, we may conceive what 
ideas they have, and thence d»luce their general 
opinions of religion. As parents suffer . their 
children to grow up without education or instruc- 
tion, and were reared in the same manner th'em- 
■ selves, so neither have any- knowledge of God or 
mwality. Few of them will attend to any discourse 



i,, Google 



on religion : they hear what is said with indilFer' 
CQce, nay rather with impatience and repugnance ; 
despising alt remonstrance, believing nothing, they 
live without the least solicitude concerning what 
shall become of them after this life. ' An in- 
stance, quoted by Toppeltia, will fully illostrate 
this matter: One of the more civitised Gipseys in 
Transylvania took the resohition of sending his eoa 
to school : leave being obtained from the govern- 
ment, the lad was admitted, and was going on 
very well, under his teachers' hands. The child 
died; whereupon the relations applied to the 
magistrates and clergy for permission to ^ve the 
young man Christian burial, he being a student 
at the time of his death. On this occasion the 
priest asked, whether they believed the deceased 
would rise again at the last day? — " Strange idea ! " 
they answered ; " to believe that a carcase, a iifeless 
" corpse, should be reanimated, and rise again ! — 
** In our opinion, it would be no mere likelif to hap- 
*'p€n to him, than to the horse we flayed a few d^s 
" ago." Such are the opinions of the greatest part 
of these people with regard to religion ; it naturally 
follows, that their conduct should be conformable 
to such ideas and conceptions. Every duty is 
b^tected, no prayer ever passes their lips: as 
little are they to be found in any assembly of ' 
public worship ; whence the Waltacbian adage--' 

■l, ,z,;i.;CoogIc 



** The Gi|»spy's olmrcili. HasJuiUt-wUb hacon, and 
*' the^dogs ateit" The rttigious party from whidi 
a Gipsey a^taläses, aA tittle loses a. brother 
believer, as the one into which he goo acquires 
one. He is neither Mahometan nor Christian; 
for the doctrines of Mahomet and of Christ are 
alike unknown or indifferent to him, producing 
no other effeet than that in Turkey his cluld is 
circumcised, and baptised in Christendom. The 
Turks are so fiilly convinced of the little sincerity 
the Gipscys entertain in regard to religion, tliat al- 
though a JeW) by becoming a Mahometan, is freed 
from the payment of the charadsch, the Gipseys are 
not, at least in the neighbourhood of Constan- 
tinople. They are compelled to pay this poUtax 
«yen though their ancestors, for centuries back, 
had been Mahometans; or though they should 
actually have been a pilgrimage to Mecca: the; 
privilege of wearing a whit£-turban is the onlyj 
advantage their conversion g^ves them over un-' 
believing Jews and Gipseys. 

Such IS the respect paid by the Gipseys to 
moral institutions, in every country where they 
are found. It is true that in this, as well as in 
other things, there may be exceptions, but they 
are very rare ; by much the greatest part of them 
are as above described. Wherefore the more 
ancient, as well as the more modern, writer» 



i:,C00glc 



82 

'»giK, in positively denying that the Gipsey» ' 
have any reli^on; placing them even below the 
heathens. This sentence cannot be contradicted; 
since, so far from having a respect for religion, 
they are adverse to every thii^ which in the 
least relates to it. 



j=,CoogIc 



CHAPTER XII. 

ITieir Language, Sciences, andjrta. 

B«su>^.tha£ the Gipseya. understand and speak 
the language of the country where they live, they 
Iwwe a geMral_ language of_thejr_p_tfnt in which- 
tfeey always converse mih each otlier. Writer* 
dükr in opinion> couceruiag this language, being' 
Bodecided. whetbei* it be maHy thatof any countryv 
and who it» the people from whom it originatopt 
Some pronounce it ar mov jargon^ others say ii 
ta ^bberish. We can by no ojeans agree with 
the supporters ofi the first opinion, as the only^ 
ground for' the assertion' is barely, that they do; 
not know any oth^r lan^^ge correspondent to 
that of the Gipseys. But they do not seem td 
have considered how extravagant a surmise it i^ 
to believe a whole language an. invention ; that 
too of people rud^, uneivilisedj and hundreds o£ 
milerdiiiüäat-&öm-each other. Thi» opinion >is'to0 
^surd to «nploy more time to cotttrovert ib 
Neither cm ihe Gipsey language, be admitted, for 
gibberish ;, unless hy those who know notlung of 
Äe formen or are totally ignomnt of the. iMterj 
which i». corrupt German ; whereas the fotnm Hm 
neither German wordsi. inftexiotu^ KPr the l^iast 
afflaitjr in saond. Na Gviinan^. weie he^ttfuiC^ 



■„Google 



84 ' 

a whole day to a-Gipscy conversation, would coi» 
prehend a single expression. A third party allow 
that the language' of the originaj Gipscys was 
really vernacular, and that of some country ; but 
assert it to be so disguised and falsified, partly 
by design of the Gipseys themselves, partly by 
t adventitious events, through length of time, and 
the continual wandering of these people, that 
it ia entirely new formed, and now used by the 
Gipseys only. This opinion contains much truth } 
but carries the matter tooßu*, in not allowing that 
any traces remain to prove any particular dialect 
to be the Gipseys' mother tongue. Perhaps the 
great Biisching means the same thing, when he 
says, " the Gipsey language is a mixture of corrupt 
" words Horn the Wallachian, Sclavonian, Hun' 
" garian, and other nations." Among these, the 
best-founded notion may be, that it is the dialect 
of some particular country, though no longer so 
- pure as in the country whence it ori^nated. This 
opinion meets the greatest concurrence of the . 
, learned : and will, we hope, be fully proved in 
another part of this book,, where the subject will 
be again discussed, more fully, in order to' cor- 
roborate the other proofs of the origip of this 
' people. It will then be certified, in what country 
this is the native mother tongue. This is a poitit 
concerning which most writers think differently. 
iSometimes the Gipsey» are Hebrews, then Nu' 



i:,Coog](: 



6S 
bianst Egyptians, Phrygians, Vandals, Scjavonii 
ans, or, a» opinions vary, perliaps some other 
nation. 

It appears extraottlinary, that the language of 
a people who have lived for centuries anionjj iis; i 
and has heen matter of enquiry almost, ever suice, 
should still remain an affair of so much uncertaintyi 
Gipseys are to be found every-where, and might 
be very easily examined, as closely, and often as 
any body pleased, about their language. It would ' 
have been attended with no great trouble, to have 
made so pear an acquaintance, as to bring tjiem to 
converse with variety of people, and rtiMeby. by 
means of comparison, to have attained some degree 
of certainty. Iliis observation sounds plausibly; 
but on a closer examination the pase is fouud to bti 
vfecy different. First, it is not so. easy as people 
may imagine, to gain much information from the 
Gipseya concerning their language. They are 
suspicious,.. apprehending an exphination might I^ \ 
attended with danger to themselves; and are there- \ 
fore, not very communicative. To this must be 
added, their natural levity, antl consequent seem- 
ing inattention to the questions put to them. A 
Writer, who had' frequent eJcperience of this be- 
haviour, expresses hifiiseif to the following effect: 
" Suppose any person had an inclination to learn 
" the Gipsey language, he .would find it very d[ffi- 
*' cult to accomplish his purpose. Intercourse with 
- H 8 

, L, ,z;;i .Google 



** these pKip\e is sXmoiSt hislriFerable ; iAd vetf ftW 
" öfthetn havftsense enOugli to teach a»iy thing « 
" even to give a proper answer to a qucstioti. If 
*' you ask about a single vtryrtl, they chatter it gi^at 
"many, whrch nobody can ühderstÄnd. Othen 
^'Wve equätty fäilfed of Success, not being able» 
" by aöy Wifeaos whatever, to obtain from them H« 
" pattrhö'ster in their own language." Secondly, 
iüfjpöse lihe language of the Gipseys had been 
Ifje^ectiy understood soon after their arrival in 
Europe, vati^y of o'pinions wouH nevertheless 
have Wen ft)aintained among the learned. It 
liroäÜ stiU have b^n necessary, m o^-der to ascer- 
taSii truth, to ^ave revised the original languages 
df ^1 the inhabitants bol^ in and out «f Europe, 
'dr at least a general sketch trf them. By «ich a 
revi'e*!', the Oipseys* mother tongue *n%ht easily 
havft been discovered. "Biit »any the« are, as 
Biittner, SchTozer, Gibelin, and Bschmeister, "frho 
"have taken gtekt pains in the minute investigiition 
tJf iJie tanguäges, -as well as 'manners, of ^Äwent 
peopTe, ahd rebkon '^hose tfdey have leaifled fcy 
•■ doztas. Hotv was it, indcfed, ptossibte for «he 
leartibfl of fortnur centut*« to be cöttipeteht to the 
Wiqtdty, äs they had not the -aitla 'vAiidh ftbw *> ' 
Copiously Occur to *the historicat etyntök^i^t? 
iVßCny Elects ^ve %een ^iscovem}, und our 
kböWltidge df otliers igrcfttly iniefeasdd, «4tlnto äie 
tun fi^ bt ^xty years. l>«>iQg 'thait %irm, ütc 



i:,COO^IC ■ 



tre^ures of the farthest north have heea o^ixed ; 
aad th? most eastern idioms become more familiar 
to us : we even know how the Otaheitiau expresses 
himself. All this information did not exist beforej 
knowledge in this science was much niore con* 
fined üian at this period : nor was it possible f^i 
the most learned man, so circumstanced, to point 
out the country in which the Gipsey langusg^ 
was spoken. 

The Gipseys luve no writing, peculiar to them, 
in wliich to express their language*. Writing or. 
xeading, is, in general, a very uucotnnioi) accooi' ' 
plisliment with any of them; nor must ' either of 
these attainments he at all expected amoQg th? 
wandering sort. Sciences and the refined arts ^re. 
never to be looked for amongst people whose 
manner of living and education ^re so irr^ular. 
Twiss does, indeed, mention, that the Spanish 
Gipseys have some knowledge of nicflicine gnd 
surgery ; but woe betide the person who cop$4^ 
in their skill ! It is absurd to appose that th«jr 
are possessed of any secret for extinguishing fire: 
superstition formerly gave the Jews credit for this 
ait; in process of Umc, the Qip^eys bXso were. 
bdieved to be gifted with it- Music i^ th^ oply 

* It ia reported in Hnngary, thai s Gipsejr slpbabd k aom«- '"'^ 
where preterved ; but nobody eief ka» teen m cvnr will m it, 
for it probably never existed: u these people 4vi not bring the 
art of writing from their own cotintry i where tbuy belong to » 
chus of people who, by expres» hyi», u* prohiÜtefi tnta leceivi 
jug ii(y kiod of iutractimi. ' • 

- . , _ L,;,-z,;i.,C00^[i: 



science in whicli the Gipseys participate, in any 
consifieräble degree : they likewise compose, but . 
it is after the manner of the eastern people, extem- 
pore. In Wallachia, no other peöplt^ possess this 
talent; and, like the Italian improvtsatori, they 
always accompany their verses with singing and 
music. The quality of the poetry of these ready 
composers may be appreciated, whea it is known 
that the riiyme is the part most considered: lo 
accomplish this, they are frequently guilty of the 
most glaring solecisms in grammar; besides their 
ideas are usually of the most obscene kind, and 
these expressed in the gross style of rude unpoHshed 
people. It is not necessary, therefore, to be a ma- 
ster, to hold their art in the greatest contempt *. 

• Poetry and Music are ia equal esteem among the Transalpine 
Wollachians, wbo have coiuigned over these two amiable sisters 
fo the licmtiuusness of slaves — Gtpscys. These alone sing, play, 
rhyme — for we cannot allow the appellation of poems lo obscene 
hobbling verses, put together at the moment. By way of sample 
tske the following couplet : 

fiittdika, Mittdiia, ■B/Un^iaig quittci f 
panu, Btttift, n' am ttc/ttJätKi. 
I^i^i ttche f&ttch, which should be Ucke *tjak, is a monstrous 
perversion ot language. But the Gipsey vratiicd a rhjroe for 
piatith: so directly, with a, bold poetical licence, ie changes 
the first peraoii of the conjunctive for the third of th« indicative 
mood. Thus diis litUe fumppiition, in question wd answcTi 
' which ahoulil bf. 

Little one, pttle one. Come from thence ! 
JJoi no, no, no, i hmewthvigtodo (there). 
he cbsn^es to, / hate natlmg, vhat (^ vw f 



CHAPTER XIII. 

Character and Capacities of the Gipseys ; whether 
they are an Advantage or a Deti-iment to States. 

Imagine a people of childish thoughts, whose 
minds are filled with raw indigested conceptions, ' 
. guided more hy sense than reason, and using un- 
derstanding and reflection only so far as they pro* 
mote the gratification of any particular appetite;— 
and you have a perfect sketch of the general char 
Tacter of the .Gipseys. 

- They are lively j uncommonly loqnaciou«.i -fickle 
to an extieme, consequently inconstant in their 
pursuits ; faithless to every body, even of their own 
caste ; void of the least emotion of giutitude, fre* 
quently returning benefits with the most insidious 
malice.- Fear makes them slavishly comptiant* 
when under subjection ; but having nothing to ap- 
prehend, like other timorous people, they are cruel. 
A desire of revenge often causes them tg take the 

* Sulzer, with resprct to their timiditj^, w.yi : <* A Gipiey re- 
** quires to have been a long time in thr army before he can meet 
"an enemy's balb with decent ■oldiei'a resolution ; or to be«nexr 
" perieDced robber, before he Can take « tiav«l|er'i purae, wi|I|> 
"out having tint, from a busb, either killed or disabled biin,'' 
There is a proverb in Transyi*ania, that " Vou may drive fifty 
Gipseji before you with a w^t rag." Thicknene found Uw Gip« 
fcyi exactly the tame in SjMtin 



i:,C00gic 



0> 

most desperate resolutions. Thus they vowed no 
le->s than death against a respectable Gennan prinee 
who died not many years ago, because, on account 
of their mUdeeds, he had persecuted and diiven 
theB>from his territories. Tliey even went so far 
as to o^er a reward among themselves (probably 
•oniething considerable'} to whoever would deüver 
fcitn «• them, «tNier alive or dead- Hot did thef 
^ve wp thiji tatoleat design, till «ome of theai^ 
^p talked too openly ^»out it in the Darmstadt 
-dominions, were taken, and being delivered up to 
^e par^s concerned, paid the forfeit of their live» 
for their good intei.itions. 

To such a degree of violence is their fury some- . 
tiroes excited, tiiat a oiotbpr h^ been known, ia 
the excess of passion, to take her small infant by 
^w fiaet, whes no other instnimeat has readily pre* 
•ented, and therewith strike the i^ect of her ang». 
I Th^ are «o addicted to drinking, u to sacti&n 
! what is most necessary to them, that they may 
gratify Uieirlaste for spirihiour liquors. Tbey ha^ 
likewise, what onf would little «xpeet, an enorm- 
ous share of vanity, which is evidenced in their 
fondness for fine dnthest and their gait and de* 
partmcnt when dressed m them. It might fac-sup 
^sed that this pride would have the good eflfect of 
rendering the Gipsey cautious not to be guilty of 
Buch crimes as subject him topubUc shame : but hero 
his l£vfty of cbarapt^ is rendered «nospifiUQuar fos 



:, Google 



91 
be -never tooks ei^er to die right or to ük teft in 
his transactioDs^ and though his conceit &ad pride 
are sotnewbat humbied during the time of punish* 
ment, ami while the consequect pain lasts, tliCK 
being ov^r, he no loiigw remembers hi* disgrace, 
but entertains quite as good, an opinion of himself 
as before. The GipseysaFe loquacious and qtrafrel- 
»ome ^_jhic_high«t degree, tlKxigh they teldMn 
tnakeinuch noise in their huts, in whidi the^ gene- 
rally keep quiet enou^ : but in the pubHc mark^ 
■and before alehouses, where they are surrounded by 
a number of spectators, they bawl, spit ateach othn* 
— catch up sticks and cudgels, vapour and brand- 
ish them ov-er their heads — throw dust and dirt— 
now run from each otherj then back again,' with 
furious gestures atid threats. The women scream, 
dn^ tlieir husbands by force from the scene of ac- 
tion ; these break from them, again, and return to ' 
it : the children, too, howl piteously. After a ' 
sh<»'t ' time, without any person's interfemnce^ 
when they have cried ami made a noise till they 
are tired, and without cither pvty having recefved 
any personal injury, the aftair finishes itsetf, and 
they separate, with as much Obta^tMion as ifthey 
bad performefi the.inoM heroic feats. 

TMug the Gipsey seeks honour ! of which bw 
ideas seldom coincide with those of othef people, 
and sometimes deviue entiiiely from pm^^ty ; we 
may tli^cff^ Bfiwtt, what all, who have tDad« ah' 



, Cookie 



5« 

; lerVattons on, these people ^ree in, that honour 
and shanie are to them totally indifferent We es- 
tablish' this decision by comparing Gipsey notions 
with our own : tiying their dealings and conduct 
by this standard, -they will oftenappear ricüculous^ 
frequently even infamous. 

Nothing can exceed the unrestrained depravity 
of manners existing among these people, particu- 
larly the softer sex. Unchecked by any idea of 
shame, they give way to every desire. The mo- 
ther endeavours, by the most scandalous arts, to 
train her daughter for an offering to sensuality; 
and the latter is scarcely grown up, before she 
becomes the seducer of others. Let the dance, for- 
merly mentioned, be called to mind ; it will then 
be unnecessary to adduce fresh examples, of which 
regard for decency will not permit a detail. 

Their indolence has been already quoted. Lazi- 
ness is so natural to them, that were they to subsist . 
by their own labour, only, they would hardly have 
bread for two of the seven days in the week. 
This disposition increases their propensity to steal« 
ing and cheating — the common attendants on idle- 
ness. They seek and avail themselves of every op- 
portunity to satisfy their lawless desires. Thomas 
sius endeavours to propagjtte a notion, that this ha. 
bit ha» grown upon the latter Gipseys by degrees, 
in opposition to the practice of those who first ar- 
jived, quoting Stumpf for his authority, who talk» 



;i ^Google 



SS 

4f Chriatian discipline and order among the original 
Gipseys; be assures us, too, that they paid ready 
niouey for ail they wanted; but'thjs testimony does 
tiot deserve attention : the Gipseys in Stumpfs time 
weie the same as they are at this day, nor are they 
differently described by any of the old writers. 

This is a lamentable enumeration of evit and 
ruinous po)perties in the Gipsey's character, which 
applies not only to a few individuals, but to by far 
the greatest number of these people. Scarcely any 
virtue could exist in a soul so replete with vices. 
What at first sight appears less censurable, or per- 
haps even amiable, in them i^ their habitual con- 
tent in their situation. They have no care about 
futurity ; they are unacquainted either with anxiety 
dr solicitude: and~pass through "every day hvely 
^and satisfied. But this, in itself commendable re- 
signation, is as little to be accounted a virtue 
among the Gipseys as among the Iroquois, and 
proceeds from the excessive levity of their dis- 
positions. 

Let us now take a view of the natural qualities, 
and capacities, of the Gipseys. Here tlwy will ap- 
pear to advantage. Observe them at wliatever em'- 
. ployment you may, there always appear sparks of 
genius. It is well known,' and no writer omits to 
remark, what artful curious devices they have re 
course to in perpetrating any cheat or robbery : but 
(his is QQt (he only particular in wliicb they shew - 



i':v Cookie 



brain» and capacity. The fallowing extract froüi 
an Hungarian author, who was an attentive ob- 
lerver of these" people, contains corroborating 
instuices ; 

V " The Gipseys," he aaya, " have a fertile iniagina- 
" tion in their way, and are quick and ready at ex- 
" pedicots, so that in many serious doubtful cases 
** they soon recoUect how to act, in order to extri- 
" cate themselves. We cannot, indeed, help won- 
** deling, when we attend to and consider the skill 
•* they display in preparing and bringing their works 
" to perftx:tion, which is the nwre necessary, from 
'' the «carcity of proper tools and apparatus. They 
" are very acute and cimning in cheating or thiev- 
** iBg: and when called to account, for any fraud or 
" robhery, fruitful in invention and persuasive in 
" their arguments to defend tliemselv-es." 

At 'Debrezin, as well as at other schools in 
Hungary and Transylvania, there have been several 
lads admitlied' for instruction. Cleverness is ob- 
servable in all, with no despicable talents for study. 
If another proof should be wanting, let «s advert 

<■ to their ^ill in music. That no Gipsey has ever 
aignalised himself in literature, notwithstanding, 
according to She foregoing accounts, many of them 
Jiave pRrtaTten of the instruction tp be obtained at 
public scbools, is no contradiction to the point in 
question. Their volatile disposititm and unsteadi- 

'^et^ wilt not allow them to coiQplete any thing 



i:,C00glc 



«rhich requires perseverance or application. Fre» 
qücntly the bud perishes before it blows; or if it, 
proceed so far that frait appears, it commonly faib 
off and rots ere it attains maturity. Id the midst 
of his career of learning, the recollection of his 
origin seizes him ; a desrre arises to return to, w1}at 
he lliinks, a more happy manner of life ; this soli> 
citude increases; he gives up all at onc&, turns 
back again, and consigns over his knowledge ta 
oblivion. Such is the rewon why the Gipsey race 
iias never produced a learned man, nor ever will so 
long as these principles are retained. 

It appears certain that the Gipseys are not de- . 
ficieüt in capacity ; and it seems equally decided 
that they have thi'ou^out a wicked depraved tura 
of mind. Their skill and ingenuity mi^t render ' 
them very profitable subjects to the state, but their ' 
disposition makes them the most useless pemicicnia | 
"beings. They are not^ fit for agriculture, nor any 
other wt wjiich^requires industry ; on the contrary, 
they are burthensome ^m their begging, they do'' 
mischief by their various im^^si^Oh^ besides, hmng 
thieves and robbers, tbey destroy the security of a 
state. TTk goWwashers, in Tra mylv ania aiul the.'' 
Banot, are the only considerable exceptions j diese 
Gipseys ai% considered the best of the caste; they 
liave no intercourse wi^ those of their own nation, 
flor "do diey like to be called Gtpseys, but Brits^ 
chen, and in the Hunguian l3ii|;ui^ Artmgmx 



:, Google 



96 
(gpW collectors). Tlieir employment not being; 
profitable, they are generally poor and necessitous^ 
jet seldom beg, and it is still more rare for them 
to .steal. Content with their scanty subsistence, 
they sift gold sand in summer; in winter they 
make trays and troughs, which they sell in an 
honest way.- These properties render them, not 
only harmless, hut serviceable to govermenl; as 
they annually produce large sums, which, but for 
. them, would remain in tlie earth. What pity it is, . 
that so small a part should be well inclined, in pro- 
portion to the multitude in Transylvania and else- 
where, who live in the manner •above described ! 
Tliere remains perhaps one more profession, in 
which a state might reap advantage from the Gip- 
seys, viz.- that of a miUtary life. This seems to be 
doubted in Spain, as no Gipsey there, even were he 
so inclined, can becoipe a soldier. In othercoun- 
tries, people think differently. For example, in ■ 
the two Hungarian regiments, the Orosaish and the 
/ Julaish, nearly every eijghib man is a Gipaey. In 
- order to prevent eitl)er them or any other persons 
from remembering their descent, it is ordered by 
government, that as soon as a Gipsey joins the 
regiment, he is no longer to be called by that ap- 
pellation. Here he is placed, promiscuously witb 
other men ; and by this wise regulation, may be 
systematically rendered usefiil. But whether he 
would be adequate to a soidiefs station, uiimixed 



i:,C00glc 



97 ■ 
with stratigers, in the company of his equals only, 
is Very doubtfai. " His healthy robust body, active , 
On every occasion ; at the same time ao inured to j 
hardship, that he can defy hunger, thirst, heal^ j 
cold, and other inconveniences; makajüauexr ' 
tremely well qualified .fpj. a military life : on the 
other hand, his innate properties seem incompatible 
with his professibo, and he has little of the essen- 
tial requisite for a serviceable soldier. How could 
a regiment composed of people without heart or 
courage, who would be overcome with fear and 
dismay on the least appearance of danger, who 
would give up every thing, arid oojy think of 
saving themselves by flight, ever perform any great 
action? Or how could we expect, from their levity, 
and' unspeakable want of foresight, that they should 
avail themselves to the utmost of any advuitage 
with proper precaution and judgment ? The follow- 
ing incident, taken from the Hungarian annals, 
may serve as proof,- whether this suspicion be or 
be not well founded.r-In the year 1557, during 
the troubles in Zapoly, the castle of Ns^y Ida, in 
the county of Abauywar, was in danger of being 
besieged and taken by the imperial troops. Francis 
von Perenyi, who- had the command, being short 
of men, was obliged to- have recourse to the Gip- 
seys, of \vhom he collected a thousand; these he 
furnished with proper means of defense, and sta- 
, tioned them in the outworks, keeping his OH'n 



:,.;,i,z.db,CoOglc 



»a 

saaji conplimfnt o£ men to gaciisou tbe citadeL 
The Gipseys imagined that they should be pet- ■ 
fectly free frran atuH^aoce behind their entteach^ 
ments. and thcrefon went courageously to their 
posts. Every thing was in order when the enemy 
arrive^ and the &t<»m commenced. The Gi{)seys, 
behind their fMtificatioas, supported the attack 
with so rauch m<we resolution^ than wa» expected, 
Rtuming the enemy's fire with such aiacrity^ that 
the assatlants, little suspecting who were the de- 
fendants, were actually retreatiag. They had 
hardly quitted their ground, when the c(Hlq^erors, 
elated with joy on their victory, crept out of their 
hol^ crying after them, " Go and he hoiked, 
" you rascida ! Thank God we had no more powder 
" and shot, or we would have played the very 
" devil with you ! " — " What 1 " replied the retiäng 
besiegers, as they turned about, and, to theiv great 
astonishment, instead of regular troops ^scoveied 
a motley Gipsey tribes " are you the beroea! isitsO 
** with youlT immediately wheeling about to 1^ 
left, sword in band, they drove the bteek «ew 
back to tbnr works, forced their way after, and in 
a few mtnutes totally subdued them. Thus the af- 
^^r elided. In this manner Gipseys would &e> 
quently trifle away by beedJessoess, what they 
might have secured by good foctuae and alacrity, 
if they .were perrmtted to act in separate corps. 
There ai« mny instaWM vworded in the amiab 



i:,Googlc 



89 
of former centuries, of Gipseys having been em- 
ployed in military expeditions: but seldom, or la- 
Jther never, were they thou ght q£js soldiers. At 
Crupa,' 1565, they prepared c^npn balls for the * 
Turks: still earlier, in 1496, they served Bishop 
Sigismund at Fünf kirchen in the same manner. . In 
the thirty-years war, the Swedes likewise had a 
body of Gipseys in their army. And when, in 
1086, Hamburgh was besieged by the Danes, there 
:were three companies of them in the Danish army. 
Tlieir destination was not so much to stand to their 
arms, as to perform other services ; they were 
chiefly employed in flying parties, to burn, plun- 
der, or lay waste, the enemy's country. As these 
are the operations most suitable to - their genius, 
they are now by the Turks destined to such pur- 
poses, and incorporated with the Sains Serdenjesti, 
and'Nephers. 

Such is the assistance which has hitherto been 
derived from the Gipseys in war; whence we ex- 
perience the possibility of their being rendered \ 
serviceable, although ,t(ie strict watch necessary to 
be kept over them, on account of their propensity 
:to be guilty of excesses and irregularities, would 
be exceedingly troublesome. 

But, in order to bring the advantages and disad- 
vantages attending them to a fair discussion, it 
nuist not be forgotten, that at the very time one 
part <Mf tbete peopl« might be rendered beneficial. 



i:,C00glc 



90 
'•iz. in time of war, another part would have it 
in their power to do more mischief; by reason of 
the disorder which then prevails, when the relaxed 
attention of the magistrates makes them more 
daring in their depredations. Besides, what is slill 
worse, they are very convenient for the enemy to 
use as machines for treachery. What they were 
in former times accustomed to practise very com- 
monly, they still continue whenever they have an 
Importunity. They have been generally decried, 
in early ages, as traitors and spies : perfiaps this ac- 
cusation may be too far extended, but it is not 
without foundation. A Gipsey possesses all the 
properties required to render him a fit agent to be 
«mployed in traitorous undertakings. Being neces- 
sitous, he is easily corrupted ; and his misconceived 
ambition and pride persuade him that he thus be- 
comes a person of consequence : he is at the same 
time too inconsiderate to reflect on danger ; and, 
artful to the greatest degree, works his way under 
the most diflScult circumstances. 

This accusation may be (Jrofred hy more than one 
' instance — Count Eberhard, of Wirtemberg, with a 
train of forty people, made a pilgrimage to Pales- 
tine in the year 1408: and, as Cnisius says, fell 
into the hands of the Sultan of E^ypt, through the 
trtachcry ofthe Gipseys. Further, during the trou- 
bles excited by John Zapolya, in Hungary, in th* 
sixteenth Century^ stmdry spies and delegated in- 



L;,.;,-z.d=,G00gIC 



cemliaries weretaVen, which provecOtohe Gipseys'. 
Ili 16Ö2 Count BasCa, the Imperiati j^enefal, who 
btsiegeH the city of Bistritz in Transylvania, when 
he wanted to circulate a letter among tire besieged, 
effected it by meansof a Gipsey. ' i' 

Tliey have been aometimes still fflfrt-iS dan^rous 
to a country, by hai-bouring othei' spies, w^io, 
nnder the disguise of Gipseys, made excursions, 
surveying; cities and countries, without being no- 
ticed. An example of this kind is recited iii the 
Adventures of. a certain French engineer, Peter 
Durois ; which is a circumstance, in the records of 
Louis XIV. perhaps as much unknown as it is re- 
'markable. It relate», that at Padock (Patak), in 
Upper Hungary, a great fire happened, through 
the carelessness of the Gipseys,; by which not only 
the little city adjoining the foVt was burnt, but the 
beautiful Bruderhoff was also reduced to aslics : on 
which occasion seven supposed Gipseys were taken 
into custotly, one of whom was the French engineer 
above mentioned. This person had travelled abotit 
with them during nine years : he had sketches of 
all the principal fortifications in the whole Roman 
empire, and the imperial hereditary dominions, 
taken in the most concise manner, with remarks 
where each place was least defensible. — This attdir 
has still another voucher, who says, "in the month 
"of June 'of the year I676, the Gipseys fired this 
" httie city (Patak), together with the church. 



92 
*' With these Gipseys was found a Freach ien^neeFf 
" named Peter Durois, who had been nine ynn in 
"this disguise, and received considerable remit' 
" tancea frwn Fraoce. He was taken by 'the impe- 
" rialiats, and there were found upon him plans of 
" almost all the cities of Upper Hungary, and the 
" German empire." 

Thus these people, in whatever point of view 

they are considered, are found to cause inc^cula- 

I ble damage and mischief, without, in general, re- 

t turning the smallest profit or benefit to the state 

in which they reside. 



i.vCtKlglc 



/ CMAPTEIt XIV. 

Cottcenfing the Toleration of the Gipseys by the 

different States of Europe. ' 

Fboh tbe inhei£ntjfiul and pemicious^ualities of 
the Gipseys, the question arises, What a govern- 
meat can do with them P The evil they occasion 
- has long been a subject of serious consideration^ 
and various means of security have been devised. ' 
As banishment was a mode punishing formeriy oflen 
i^sorted to, nothing could be more natural than 
that it should likewise be exercised against the 
Gipsejs. Tlie clergy and politicians inveighed 
strongly ag^nst the toleration of these people ; 
and their exile was actually resolved upon in most 
countries of Europe. , 

About the end of the fif^nth century« their 
persecution commenced in Sp^n. King Ferdinand, 
who esteemed it a good work to expatriate useful 
and profitable subjects— Jews, and even Moorish 
families — could much less be guilty of an impro- 
priety in laying hands on the mischievous progeny 
of the Gipseys. The edict for their extermination 
was published in the year 1493. But, instead of 
passing the boundaries, they slunk into hiding- 
places, and shortly after appeared every-where in as 
great numbers as before. The emperor Charles V. 



:,.;,l,z.d=,G00gIf 



94, 

pereecuted them afresh; as did Philip IF. ako. 
Since that time they have nestled in again, and 
wtre left unmolested till about twenty yeftrs ago, 
wheD they were threatened \yith another storm ; 
but it blew over, without taking, effect. 

In France, Francis I. passed an edict for their 
expulsion ; and at the assembly of the St&f«» of 
Orleans, in 1561, all governors of citi« r^cj^ved 
orders to drive them away with fife and sw^d; 
Nevertheless, in process of time they had ciillected 
again, and increaked to such ä degree, that in 
t6i2 anew order came out for their extermina- 
tion. 

in Italy, their situation has been eqnally pre^ 
carious. In the year 1572 they were conipelled to 
retire From the territories of Milan and Parma; 
and at a period somewhat eariier they were chased 
beyohd the Venetian jurisdiction. 

England first endeavoured to disbur'hen itself 
of them in the year 1531, under Henry VIII; but 
AS the act passed for that purpose fell into dis- 
regard, a new one was published in the reign of 
Elizabeth. 

They were not allowed the privilege of remain- 
ing unmolested in Denmai k, as the code of Danish 
laws specifies : " The Tartars (Gipseys) who wander 
" about evcIy-^i'here, doing great damage to the 
"people, by their lies, thefts, and witchcraft, 



!:, Google 



" shidl be taken into custody by every magis 
*( traw." 

- Sweden has not been more favourable, having at 
three difierent times attacked them. A very sharp 
order for their explusion came out in the year l66ä:' 
The diet of 1723 published a second: and that of 
17S7 repeated the foregmig, with additional se-' 
■*erity. 

- They were excluded from the Nethnlandaf 
Htider pain of death, partly by Charles V. xai' 
partly afterwards by tlic United Provincts irt- 
15«2. . 

• Finally, the greatest number of septoicea of 
exile have been- pronounced against them iiX 
Germany. As well imperial decrees, as' those of 
particular princes, have been repeatedly issued, 
for removing these people. The beginning was 
made, under Maximilian I. at the Augsburgb diet 
in 1500; where the following article was drawn 
up : " Respecting those people who call themselves 
** Gipscys, roving up and down the coiintry-*.By 
'* public edict, to all ranks of the empire,, accord^ 
" ing to the obl^iations under which they are 
" bound to Us and the Holy £mpire, it is strictly , 
" ordered, that in future they donot permit the said 
" Gipseys (since there is authentic evidence c^their 
" being spies, scouts, and conveyers of intettigeooe, 
^' betraying the Christians to the Turks) to pass or 
"«main within their territories^ nor- to jtrlde or. 



i.vCoogIc 



9S 
" traffic ; ndther to grant them protectitHi nor con- 
" voy. Aad that the said Gipseys do witfadraw 
** themselv«, before East«: next eosuiog, from the 
*' German duminions, entirety quit them, nor 
** SB&r themselves to be found therein : as in case 
" they should transgress af^er that time, and re- 
" ceive injury from any person, they shall have no 
*' redress, nor shall such person be thought to have 
** committed any crime.* The same business 
occupied the attention of the diet in 1530, 1544-> 
4B-S 1 ; and was also i^n enforced ta the im- 
proved police reguIa~tion of Frankfort in 1577> 

Several princes were however so little attentive 
to these orders of the empire, that, instead of 
endeavouring to drive out the Gipseys, they, on 
the other hand, furnished them with passports 
and safe-conducts: others, on the contrary, and 
by far the greatest number, exerted themselves to 
the^utmost to clear their states of this vermin, 
and some still continue the same watchfulness. 

Hence it appears how universally the opinion 
was adopted, that banishing the Gipseys. was the 
only method to be secure irom their malignity: 
Perhaps there is not one civilised state, Hungary 
and Transylvania excepted, where this remedy has 
not been tried: tmt whether it be as expedient 
as it has been hiüierto general, is much to be 
doubted.r~ 
In i^ first phu:e, it had veiy Uttl« effect^ and 



i.,CpogIc 



97 
that little was only temporary. Even if erery 
civilised nation had driven out the Gipseys at the 
same time, Europe could not have been entirely 
cleared of them, so long as they preserved aa 
asylum in Turkey. Now, as experience evinces 
tbere is no country in which a constant equ^ 
attention is pud to the executicm of the laws, they 
would^ -in more or less time, have again insinuated 
themselves into the neighbouring countries ; from 
these into others ; and recommenced where they 
had left off. But a general exterminarion never 
did happen : for the law for banishing them passed 
in one state before it was thought of in the next 
or when a like order had long become obsolete and 
«unk into oblivion. 1'hese desirable guests -were, 
therefore, merely compelled to shift their quarters 
to an adjoining state, where they remained till 
the government began to clear them away ; upon 
which the fugitives either retired back whence 
they came,, or went on progressively, to a tbird 
place, thus making a continual revolution. 

Secondly, this remedy was premature: endea- 
vouring to exterminate was the same as if a surgeon 
should proceed directly to the amputation of a 
diseased Umb, because it created inconvenience to 
the rest of the body. Whereas the first enquiry 
ought to be. Whether the disorder were of such a 
nature, as not to be removed but by entire separat 
*ion ? T1ÜS is a desperate course, ajfid fthould only 



i:yC00glc 



be at^t^ted when no other can be dBcEudous. 
Though it be prwed that the Gipi>eys had occa^ 
ticmed ever so much mischief, it was not iippossible. 
that they might cease to be such perniciops beings: 
at least there had never been any trial made, by 
wlUch this impossibility could be ascert^n^d. 
Men may be formed to any thing. Had proper 
means been used for their civilisation, it is highly 
'probable the event would have proved tlut they 
were not incapable of becoming better. If several 
Gipseys, at diflFerent times, have voluntarily emergr 
cd from their savageness, how much more likely 
is it tbtt tlie remainder might have been altered» 
had they received such aids as their necessities 
required ? — But expelling the Gipseys entirely wa» 
not merely a premature step ; it was, 

Thirdly, a wasteful one. This may perhaps 
appear strange, but is indisputable, so long as the 
state maxim holds good — that a, numerous popular 
tion is the most advantageous. It is allowed 
that 8 state would not lose any thing by the 
Gipseys, as Gipseys; on the contrary, it wovfld 
be a gainer, because an obstacle to the general 
welfare would be removed : but this is not the 
matter in question. If the Gips^ do not know 
how to make use of the facultieawith which natu» 
has endowed him ; let the state teach him, and 
keep him in leading-strings .till the end is'attaiiied. 
And though the root of this depravity lie >o deep. 



i.vCoogIc 



that it csnnot be removed in the firstgeneratiot^ 
a contiouation of the same care will, in the secoud 
:iBd .third descent, be suFe of meeting its reward. 
Kow let lis reflect on a Gipsej v/heji he has dis- 
oootin^ed his vagrant mode of living — cooaider 
hiä ivith hit fecundity and numerous family, who 
fay bdog reformed are made useful citizens — and 
ve shall percnve how great a want of economy 
it was to throw him away as dross. 

'Nearly the same idea has occurred to odier aui 
thors; at least they so far agree in what has been 
advanced, that they advise rendering the Gipseys 
useful : only the means they recommend are liable 
to powerful obj^tions. They think the state might 
make public slaves, or penitentiaries, c^ these peo- 
ple, and put them to all kinds of work. But such 
tlrpendants, even supposing them to be employed 
in the moit beneficial way, are always a nuisano* 
and burtfara to a state. Besides, in the above 
scheme, there is no proposal made for the bettering 
these people : they must, therefore, remain under 
the restraint of convicts, ftom generation 'to gener 
ration. And, if allowed to increase, what could 
hfi done at last with this multitude and their brood ? 
Would not whole dbtricts be required, merely to 
turn the thousands of these wretches into? More« 
over, what an expense and inconvenience to super- 
intend them! Plwsible, therefore^ «s that proposal 



, Google 



100 

appears at the first glance, little will it stand the 

test of a closer examitiation. 

I Banishment was not the proper method to be 

' adopted ; nor would jl have been adviseaUe' to 

I znake them penitentiaries or galley-slaves: but care 

should have been taken to enlt^ten their under- 

- standings, and to mend their hearts." 

Hnwe\er, what has been hitherto omitted Äe« 
is still time enough to execute. Few, or scanxljr. 
any, of the lai^er statfes are so entirely cleased of 
Gipseys, that these people may not here and there 
be foutid by hundreds, in most countries by thou- 
sands. The periods when the- first sentences, (^ba- 
nishment were pronounced, were too unf^ilosophi- 
cal for any preferable mode of punishment -to be 
suggested: but it may be expected, from a more 
informed age, that better maxims will be adopted. 
We send apostles to the East and West, to the most 
distant parts of the earth, and, as will be hereafter . 
shewn, into the very country whence the Gipseys 
migrated, in order to instruct the people who know 
not God. Is it not inconsistent for men to be scdi- 
citous for the welfare of their fellow-creatures iu 
distant regions, and to throw ofiT and leave to 
chance those who, equally wretched, have brought 
their errors home to us ? If it be' a good work» to 
teach religion and virtue to such as are ignorant of 
thör Creator, why not begin with those nearest t() 



i:,Coogle 



101 . 

tu? espebiälly as neglect, in th» particular, is at- 
tended with detriment to society in general. The 
Gipseys have been long enough among civilised 
peo]^ to prove that they will not be allured, by 
the mere example of others, to free themselves 
from the fetters of old customs and vices. In 
order to accomplish that end, foreign uid more 
^fectual help is requisite. It were vain to hope for 
any considerable progress with those who are grown 
up ; it would be sufBcient, by compulsion, to make 
them quit their unsettled manner of life, and, by 
instruction and teaching to convey a glimmering 
of light to their understanding, and produce some 
amelionHon of the heart. Proper care Imug taken 
of the education of the children, society would be 
more likely to have its endeavours crowned with 
success. 



:, Google 



CHATTER XV. 

Easay oh the Improotmet^ of the Gipstys. 

Xf would be a lamentable case, if the before- 
mentioned regularions were merely pious wifthia 
Les us hope soraething better ! The work has bee» 
comtnenced; — a great empresä, Theresa, laid down 
a plan to win over these poor unfortunate people . 
. to virtue and the state. But it is to be regretted, 
that the execution of her wise dispositions, Fespec& 
ing the Gipseys in Htmgaiy, seems to h»ve been 
entrusted to people inadequate to the task. 

What was done, in her time, towards thö accom- 
plishment of this work, may be seen by the follow- 
ing article, extracted from the Newspaper already 
often quoted, call ed - Anzeigen aus den KayserL 
Konigt. Erblände} -n (Intelligence from the Heredi- 
tary Imperial Rc^yal Dominions),: " Since the year 
" 1 768, several decrees regarding these people have 
" been publish(,*d in the country (Hungary), and 
" the strictest orders dispatched to the several dis- 
" tricts in con-jequence. They were prohibited from 
" dweUing in huts or tents ; iVom wandering up 
" and down the country ; from dealing in horses ; 
" from eatjog animals which died naturally, and 
" carrion ; and from electing their own wayda or 



i:,C00glc 



108 

"judge. It was intended to extirpate the very 
*' name and language of these folks, out of the 
*' country. They were no longer to he called Gip- 
*' seys, but New Boors (Uj Magyar) ; not to con-- 
" verse any longer with each other in their own 
" language, but in that of any of the countries itt 
" which they bad chosen to reside. Some months ^ 
** were to be allowed, after which time they were 
" to quit their Gipsey manner of life, and settle, 
" like the other mhabitants, in cities or villages ; 
" to build decent houses, and follow some reputa- 
" ble business. They were to procure boors' cloth- 
" ing, to commit themselves to the protection of 
** some territorial superior, and live regularly, 
*' Such as were fit for soldiers, to be enlisted into 
" regiments.' Nevertheless, although these regula- 
tions were calculated entirely for the good of these 
people and the state, the greatest part were not 
in the smallest degree benefited by them> The 
effect which was produced gave occasion, in 'thÖ 
year 1773, for these orders not only to be repea'ted," 
but made more rigid ; and as even' this measure 
would not answer the end, it was then thoughl 
necessary to proceed to extremity with them;' 
Wherefore it was ordered, That no Gipsey shoulid 
have permission to marry, who could not prdve 
himself in condition to support a wife and child- 
■ ren : that from such Gipseys who had femilies, 
the children should be taken away by force, re' 



:,.;,l,z.d=,G00gIf 



104 
moved from their parents, relations, and intercourse 
vith the Gtpsey race, to have a better education 
given them. A beginning was made in some 
places-; and where they would not comply Volun- 
tarily, they were compelled to submit' to the decree. 
At Fahlendorf in Schutt, and in the district of Press- 
bui^, all the children of the New Boors (Gipses) 
above five years old, were carried away in waggons 
during the night of the 31st of December, 1773, 
by overseers appointed for that purpose ; in order 
that, at a distance from their parents or relations, 
they might be more usefully educated, and become 
accustomed to work. Those boors who were 
willing to receive and bring up these children, 
were p^d eighteen guilders yearly from govern- 
nfent. On the 24th of April, 1774, between five 
and six o'clock in the mornings the children of 
the Gipseys, which had been growing up from 
December of the foregoing year, were again re- 
moved from Fahlendorf in Schutt and Hideg^id, 
for the purpose of being put under the same eourse 
of discipline as the others. Among the children 
taken away on this occasion, was a girl fi^iirteen 
years okt, who was forced to submit to be carried 
off in her bridal state. She tore her hair for grief 
and rage, and was quite beside herself with agita- 
tion : but she recovered a composed state of mind ; 
and, in 1776, in Fasching obtained permission 
to accomplish her marriage. 



:,.;,l,z.dbyG00glc 



,- So &r out intelligence quoted 6-om the Gazettes; 
by which we may see how prudently every thing 
was concerted. It is tru^ the means here used 
are compulsory; but such measures were necessary^ 
and the only ones capable of insuring success. ' 
Moreover, it may at the same time be obser\'ed, 
although the publisher of this infortnatioo endea" 
Tours to conceal it, how little these salutary regular 
tions were put in force: there were. scarcely two 
places in the kingdom, where even an endeavour 
was made to give them proper effect This 
snpineness must have been unknown to the emperor 
Joseph, or he would certainly have ag^n enforced 
them, to all chiefs and^govemors, at the same time 
that he gave orders for. their being observed in 
Transylvania. . 
' The tenor of the decree just mentioned, which 
was pubhshed in, the yrar .176S, was consonant 
with the intenti«n of Theresa with regard to the 
Hungarian Gipseys, namely, that those also in 
Transylvania should become better men, and more 
«aeAil inhabitants. For the accomplishmeat of 
which, it prohibits their wandering about and 
living under tents; requires that they become 
settled, and . put themselves under some territunal 
diief. In t>rder to strike immediately at the root 
of the evil, necessaiy and minute directions are 
^^ven for the improvement of their religious ideas 



:, Google 



IM 

liid ojunioAS, And, by corrtetiiig thflir ncious 
Iiabits, for rendepi'Bg them good cititena. 
Ers^ with respect to reügion, they mart 

1. Not only be taught the prineiplet <^ n* 
ligion themselves, but send thetr diitdren 
early to 'school: 
S; Prevent, as mtich as possible, their chäd^ 
ren from running abotit naked, in the 
house, the roai^ and street^ thereby 
giving ofioiw aad disgust to other, 
people i 
8. In their dwcHtegs, not permit their ehUd^ 
ren to steep promiscupaaly .by eacli other, 
without distioctioQ of sex : 

4. Diligently attend at church, particuUrly 

on Sundays and holidays, to give ptw^ 
of their Christian dispoution : 

5. Put themseWes^ under the guidance of 

spiritual teaidisrs, and oofiduct themselv«» 
conformably to the rules laid down by 
them. •■-.•'■_ 

Seemdly, with legard to their temporal conduct 
uid better mode of living, they are bound 

V. To conform to Öie custom of the country, 

in diet, dress, and language : consequent^ 

' to- abstain from feeding on catti« whicb 

have died of distcmpei»; not to go !d>oiit 

ia such unseemly dretMs; and to- disr 



i.v Google 



167 

_. ' continue the üs'e of llieij owii particular 

language: . . ■ 

2."N6l to appear any more m Idrgfe cloak's/ 

which are chiefly useful to hide things 

that have been stolen. 
i. No Cripsey, except he te ä goldwasher* 

shall keej> ahorse ; also ifie gölüwäshers 
4- Must refrain from all kindi of birteHng 

at the annual fairs. 

5. The magistrates of every place must be very 

attentive, that no Gipsey waste his time 
in idleness: but at those seasons when 
they have no employment, either for 
themselves or any landholder, recom- 
mend them to some other person, with 
whom they shall be compelled to work 
for hire. 

6. They are to be kept, particularly, to agricul- 

ture ;■ 'therefore 

7. It is to be obseiTcd, where possible, that 

every territorial .lord who takes any Gip- 
seys under his jurisdiction, do allot them a 
certain piece of ground to cultivate : 
S. Whoever is remiss in his husbandry, jhall 

be liable to corporal punishment : 
9. They shall only be permitted to amuse 
themselves with music, or other things, 
when there is bo field work to be done. 
Such were the regulations wisely adopted by the 
K 8. 

■ . L;,.;,-'z^d=,CoOgk' 



108 
emperor Josepli^ for the purpose of civitiün^ and 
rendering good and profitable citizens, upwards 
■of eighty thousand miserable wretches, ignorant 
of God and virtue. It must be regretted that 
similar measures have not been used in the other 
countries of Europe, where these people still remain 
wandering ia error, and scarcely deserving to be 
considered as human beings. 



:, Google 



109 
SECTION IL 

ON TUB O&IOIN OF TOE GIESEn. 



CHAPTEE t. 

Theßrst Appearance ofGipteifi in Europe. 

No record is to be found, stating in what year» or 
inwKat part of Europe Gipseys made their first 
appearance. But it is to be premised, what will 
afterwards be investigated, that they did not ori- 
ginate in our quarter. of the globe; on the con- 
trary, that they strayed hither, as oriental strangers, 
either from Egypt, Asia Minor, or somfi other part: 
we shall thenexamine^ whether it be not possible, 
by means of what is related in old writings con- 
cerning the first observance of them in dififerenl 
countries, to follow the trade so as to ascertain 
' where and when they first set foot on European 
ground. 

Mention is made of them in Germany so earl^r 
as the year 1417, when they appeared in the vici- 
nity of the North Sea. A year afterwards we find 
them also in S wit2 erland and the country of tb« 
Grisons. In \^% th^ likewise appeared in Italy. 



:, Cookie 



It is unknown what >vas the earliest period at 
which they were observed in France and S^in : 
but their appearance in these countries must have 
?>een of later date tlian in Germany, as is proved 
in respect to France, by the name Bohemians, 
which they bear there. In regard to Spain, Cor- 
dova, in order to contradict some surmises about 
the Gipseys' mother country, uses the argument, 
that they were known in Germany prior to either 
Spain or Italy. The French make the first meu- 
■ tion of them in 1427, when, they straggled about 
Paris, having arrived th^re on the 17th, ^^ of 
August in that year. 

From what country did th^ come into G,er- 
liiany ?■ — Muratori tliinks, fcoin Italy : \}\xt how un- 
founded this qpinioD is, appeal's clearly, from theii 
cxm^ihg to tiiat country after they had been ii^ 
Gen^any. The Bologna Chronicle ascertain^ tlu; 
time when Italy beca4ne. acquainted with thes^ 
people.. The horde therein nientioned, which ari- 
tived in that city on the 18th of July, 142S, 00% 
sisted of about a hiindred .men ; whose leader's, or 
(as they, cdled him) duke's, n^me, was Andreas. 
They travelled from Bologna to Forli, intending to 
proceed to pay the Pope ä. visit at Ilgme. Mura- 
tori founds his judgment on this chrooicl^ no^ 
knowing that Gipseys arespoken of in the Qennan 
prints five years earlier. 
. ';'StilLJesä truf is what M^us. asserts^ th^.thgr 



i:,C00glc 



Ill 

earae from Spain, and first entered the Germaa 
tttritom» m the year 1492, when they were driveii. 
oot of Spam by Ferdinand the Catholic. . Hungary 
is certainly the couHtry whence they came into 
Germany. Not only tlie time confirms this con- 
jecture, as we find them in Hungit^ in 1417t ^^ 
very same year in which they were first observed 
in Germany, but Aventin expressly mentions Uun> , 
gaiy among the cotvitjies from which he suppose» 
them to come. 

In this state our examination rests,- in regard to 
whether they came immediately into Germany, or 
' first appeared stationary in some other place.. . 
, That Poland should be the country which Iwr- 
boured the first Gij^s^s, and that they s^rie^ 
thenct into W-allactiia, Transylvania, and other 
countries, is a mere arbitrary surmise, The writer 
(J: G. Eccard) who advances this opinion, appeal^ 
to Miinater-'s intelligence, but that do^ not con- 
tain a syllable in confirmation of it. Others, wit^ 
the greatest confidence, maintain that WaUaehia 
' and Moldavia, where they also wandered about i^ 
;' 1417, are the places' in which they made their first 
appföirance in Europe. Cantemir, oa the eeatruy, 
h very undecided, saying, " Whence, or at what 
" time, this nation arrived in Afotdavia, neithec do 
" they know themselves nor is there any mraitioa 
" n>ade in our annualpublicatioiis." : Hpwev«i^.tlip 
seeond opipiea «eeiuf to apjwoaeb v«i«)( Bca^-^ 



i:,C00glc 



truth, but does not point out the particulsr jmv 
lince in which the Gipseys weie first observed ;— 
Of what use would that be? But one informatipo, 
compared with other drcumstances, is of so mudi 
assistance here, that we may, mthout hesitation, 
pronounce Turkey to be the ceuntiy whence these 
eastern guests found thnr way to us. Ttus is pro* 
b^le — Firsts because Aventin expressly makes 
Turkey their original platt of rendezvous : second- 
ly, as this explains why the south-east parts of 
Europe are most crowded with Gipseys, as before 
stated (vide p. 7). It happened in Turkey, as in 
every other place through which they passed, that 
many of these wanderers remained behind ; now, 
as alt that came to Europe passed by this rout^ 
whether at once or in düTerent division^ it was 
possible, indeed a necessary consequence, that a 
greater number should continue here, than in the 
. different countries where their hordes were much 
divided and diminished. 

The time when they arrived, has been as little 
certified, as the particular place where they landed. 
perhaps, the before-quoted chronicle of Bologna 
may afford some insight into this matter. It le^ 
lates, as appears by the context, from tbe mouth 
of the leader of the horde which it describes, that 
these people had been five years wandering about 
in the world, previously to their anival at Bologna. 
t^owi if this account is to be depended on, they 



Q.;,l,ZDd.byG00glc 



US 
cannot kave arrived in Europe earlier than the jear 
1417. Bat before attaching credit to this relation, 
we are to consider, whetha the aathor of it be 
deserving of credit To place any ccKtfidence in 
Gipsey narrations, in general, would be veiy. 
imprudent; as there are too many proofs that their 
sayings are mere nonsense and contra^ctoty. 
prattle: but the case in question seepis to be an 
exception. AH the inconsistency and fidshoods 
which theGipseys reported, concerning whence they 
came, with the reasons for their w%ad^bg, have . 
an end in view. But with regard to tim^ if they 
knew, they are more to be trusted, as no injury 
could be expected to result from the knowledge of 
a mere date. Now, the inference to be drawn is, 
that the leader of ahordemtghtnotonlyknowhow ^■ 
long he had retired from Egypt, or iUia Minor, 
and travelled about in Europe, is the time had 
been shprt; but it may also be supposed, that he 
sEud what he knew. In the mean time, we will 
compare this cited term, of five years, with other 
circumstances, and see whether they make for or 
against our ailment . The first enquiry would be, - 
Whether there .are any earlier authentic accounts 
of their appearance in Europe than 1417? But.^i; 
do not find such any-where *. The. second question 

•»^ilcfc» DUici, in hia Betzisdtn CArOnik. Seit S29.tt)ri 
Jahr 1414) certainly docs uy that they arrived during the same 
year io tbe Keshan territories ; and Fabncius, Jn Amialibb.' Mint. 
fBVf the/ wcie drim fromMeUienm I4l(.' But Calviudi ctdi- 



:,.;,l,ZDtfbyG00gIt: 



to be deckled U, Whetlicr, if tliey were aotseon 

■ towards the Black Sea before 1417, tliey could in 
OBC year's time have reached the Nortli Sea? This 
doubt requires httle coasideration. A year was 
^uite sufficient for people like the Gipieys, who 
sever tarried long in a plac^, to have migrated 
even far beyond where they were found. Ag^n, 
if they were not in Moldavia and Watlachia earlier 
than the year 1417} and yet appeared during the 
same year in the neighbourhood of the NorthtSea^ 
what great difference would it make if they cams 
from a province nextbeyünd Moldavia or Wallachia» 
travelling a few miles further to arrive at the same ' 
place? It is therefore very cre<lible tliat 1417 was 

' ihe period of their arrival. 

Although, immediately after their coining into 
Germany, they spread so rapidly, tliat in 14JS 
their names were recorded in the annual publi- 
catioBS of almost every part of the country, yet 
particular places seem to have been favouredby 

■ them. Thus, in Bavaria they were not noticed till 
1433 ; and they must have very quickly withdrawn 

tradicta Fabrictus, and has. corrected his date, putltng I4I8 for 
14l6. And with regard to Dilich, there must either have been 
a mistake in thentanuscript from which he composed, or hemnst 
huve read wrong; there being no nWBtion nade of Gipteys is 
»ny of tive public prinla tilt three years afterwards, via. 1417. 
It is absurd to suppose thoy should remain invisible to every other 
{l^rton botb in and out of Germany, at the same time they ap- 
Mafed.t«l^editoio(£}ilich's itrfcUigence. 



:, Google 



ä^iraosfilv^ ftom these parts, *s six years afterwards 
^(was remarked, as somewhat new aii(ji extraor- 
G^Qa.ry, ^hat in this year (14|39) the Gjpsey^ a 
pack of scoui^lrdsj a vagrant gang, were come into 
. th#t country, with th»r king, whose name was 
Xunfll. 

l^hey did^ not travel together, but in dJfTercnt ' 
l)<}r4^ s^ach having its leader, sometimes caUed 
CQ^nt; 4t; oth^t; times, their leaders were dignified 
with 1^? titles, of dukes or kings of Lesser Egypt. 
ftne. horde ivhich arrived at Augsburghifl I4.i9, 
althpMgh, if. consisted of only seventy men, had 
eve;i two of these dukes, beside some counts, with 
them. But what sort of creatures these great men 
among tlie Gipseys were, has been explained in 
aether place. (Vide p. 72, &;seq.) 

If Stumpf be right, the number of these people 
ipust have been very considerable. Those alone 
ivho came, into Switzerland in 1718, women and 
childreii included, were estimated at 14Q0i>- But 
here he, or his authority, spems to have greatly 
l^jscpuntcd.. It is. true, that he likewise remarks, 
tl^y did i)Dt keep all together, but went about in 
Si?par$ite^. parties; notwithstanding this, his account 
i$:much to be doubted. By what is to be found 
concerning particular hordes, there wer^ none 
ivhich ex(:eei;M one or. at mos}: two hundred. 
That whifh.vfenit to Augs^urgh in Uiy.consisted 
of but seventy men : therefore if. t]jcy had .bggp 



i.Cooglf 



so numerous as Stumpf asserts, there must have been 
at least a hundred such hordes dispersed through 
Switzerland. It was at this time(1418) thatGip* 
seys were first seen at Zurich; they were a swarm, 
whose leader's name was Michael. Four years had 
elapsed before they were known at Basil — part of 
the very horde of this Michael. Would not some 
other tribe have got to Basil before these, if they 
had been so numerous? Thomasius adopts this 
number of 14000 without suspicion, and under- 
stands it to comprehend the whole multitude all 
over Germany : but then he does not appear to 
- have quoted Stumpfs testimony in the sense it was 
meant. Many hordes of them must certainly have 
arrived, as they spread every-where so prodigiously* 
but to persist in any nearer investigation of their 
, numbers, would be only useless trouble. 

Their possessions were, as at present, small, and 
their whole arrangement singular ; besides which, 
according to the Eastern custom, they hung rag- 
' ged clothes about them, instead of other garments. 
f Their leaders only were exceptions. Several had 
horses, asses, or mules, with them, on which th^r 
loaded their tents, and efiects, with the whole 
family into the bargain. They had also dogs in 
their trun^ with which Kranz asserts they used 
illegally to destroy game : but probably the dogs 
were kept not so much for that purpose, as to take 
fowls and geese. - . . 



i.vCoogtc 



CHAPTER II. 

On the Sanctity, Passports, and Di^erence, of the 
former Jrom the latter Gipset. 

At the first arrival of the Gipseys in Europe, it 
was generally believed that they were EgyptJana 
\ and pil^ims, constrained to wander on account of 
\ religion. This mistake originated from their own 
relation; hut when required to give a more circum- 
stantial detül of the reasons for their pilgrimage, 
they varied very much from each other. Some of 
them declared that they were compelled to make 
this emigration as an atonement for their forefathers 
having, for some time, apostatised from the Chns-, 
tian faith : othei? asserted that the king of Hun- 
gaiy had s«zed their country, and imposed on 
them this penance of wandering. A third party 
represented that God had signified to them the 
. necessity of this pilgrimage, by an universal sterility 
in their country. They supposed this punishment ' 
to have been inflicted on account of sin^ommitted 
b^jhar ancestors, in refusing to receive the infant 
Jesus, when carried by his Mother and Joseph to 
Egypt; as an asylum from the persecution of 
Herod^ The tetm of their pilgrimage was to he 
icyenyears. , 

Ko evident» is neceuaiy to detennine that these 



.Cookie 



118 
were mere fables ; and it is astonishing that men 
should be found to adduce long-winded prooft of 
the origin of these people, grounded on no better 
äiithority than such idle tales. We have not now 
any positive gronnds Femainiog, to shew how these 
legends were invented, or what gave rise to them ; 
■but the feal truth seeriis to bfe merely, that upoiit 
being asked whence they cahie, thiy atistre^Eä 
from Egypt ; and thete is no rt'äsön eiiatiö'g to ' 
deny their having come from that cbarrtry. N<n*r 
. priests, monka, or perhaps oth'^r people, tili^lit 
wonder why they should quit a plate io Which ffil; 
holy family had fled for refuge, unless thÜr fört^ 
fathers had been guilty of some transgressfoü da 
that occasion ; but, be this as itmäy, all that ctiiiM' 
be said, with regard to the origin of their legehds, 
would be only mere conjecture. Let it therefore 
suffice to say, they chose to be considered ev<!ry- 
where as pilgfrinis ; ai^d' this' profession met with 
flie more r'dgdy belief, as it toincid'ed with the- 
iofatuatibn of* the tirtiei ' 

The credulity with \fliicli ptoplö cheriühed M' 
idea that the Gipäöys Weri rttel pilgriiH^ ind hoty' 
persons was attended with thö cöii^equence, thäf 
they werrf not only tolerated, btit; if the iöfoimiä-' 
tion on this head may he r^ied on; tK^ e^^fy-' 
where received 'assistance, with express Bafö-coit- 
ducts. These safe-conducts are mehtron'etf St 
Kveral cild writitig^. Isixmi^f detdtfrei^ not 



J,.:,-z,;i:,C00glc 



Hfl 
merely, in genefal terms, that they carried t^out 
with them ptssporti and Kala from the Gmpertw- 
Sigiaraund and other prineea, by means of which 
thiy had free passage through different, countrie» 
and cities, - but that he had hioiself seen aa attested 
copy of such a letter, in the possession of some 
Gijraeys at Eherbach. Besidea Kranz, Stumpf, 
and Guter, Laurentius Palmireous also agrees in 
this statement; but the latter writer i» guilty of 
a mistake, in confounding the Emperor Sigiimund 
with Sigismund king of Poland. The Gipseys 
at Bologna, likewise, shewed an instrument from 
Sigismund ; but he app^rs to have graaited this to 
them, not as ehiperor, and in Germany, but in 
Hungary, and as king of Hungary. A [»ss of 
another king of Hungary, Uladislaus IL which 
the Gipseys obtained chiefly on account of thetr 
supposed sanctity and pilgrimage, might be 
quoted. They were not destitute in Transylraaitt» 
if it be- true, as asserted, that they received thü 
■art of letters of protection from the [H'inees of the 
boose of Bathory. Wehncr says, that the Gipseys 
in France likewise quoted ancient privilegeis, gnmt- 
ed to them by the former kin^ of that coantry. 
CrusBis, Wurstisen, and Guler, mention papal 
perraiesioDS, which these people acquired, ior 
wandering, unmolested, through all Christian 
coimtries^ so long as the time of their pilgHma^ 
Uited. 



i:,C00glC- 



This is the information we find, dispersed here 
and there, concerning the privileges and passes of 
the GifMeys. To how much, or how little, are 
we to ^vt credit? Thomasius believes every thing 
>38 it stands. Aluisuerus Fritscb, on the contrary» 
declares all to be lies, and the Gipseys' own in- 
<yeDtion. Appearances are certainly equivocal, as 
none of these insCmmeDts are even verbally hand- 
ed down to us, so that they can be prc^terly 
proved ; except that of Uladislaus II. which does 
not belong to this question. , Moreover, it has 
been frequently experienced, that the Gipseys, 
using the pretence of such safe-conducts, have 
committed all' manner of excesses, and' when 
desired to produce them, had either nothing to 
shew, or such kind of papers as did not at all re- 
semble what are usually ^ven from a public office.- 
It cannot be denied that they have practised 
'- deceit, but it is impossible to assert, with certainty, 
that the whole was fallacy. If the contents of 
that passport to be found in Muratori is con- 
ceived in such terms as to allow the horde which 
possessed it to wander about seven years, to rob 
and steal every-where, without any person being 
permitted to bring them to justice, such « letter 
seems to carry ialshood on the very &ce of i^ 
as no sensible prince could ever grant such a on^ 
But what shall we say, if it be found that these 
words do not so much convey the sense of die 



i:,Coo^k' 



instrument, as a crafty explanation of the author, 
on, recollecting the many irregularities practised by 
I the Gipseys, who availed themselves of this tVee^ 
i dom to travel about every-where unmolested. Fur- 
ther, with respect to the passport which Mii.ister 
perused at Eberbach, although every persoa 
must look upon the reasons given by the Gipseya 
for their emigration as fictions, yet we cannot 
entirely reject it. How coultl it benefit them, 
being old, and having lost its validity many years 
ago? Why did not the horde to which it belonged 
carry with them some writing that might afford 
them present protection? If tliey had been guilty 
of any knavery about this letter, why was it just 
of that kind as could only serve, incontrovertibly, 
to prove they were cheats? These documents 
Would certainly not have been found among them, 
had they not been transmitted, from their parents 
and ancestors, as things of value. Supposing 
this matter to have been invented by themselves, 
it is difficult to conceive why they should confine 
their privileges to seven years, and not rather 
leave them unlimited. But there are other proofs 
of the authenticity of such letters. First, they / • 
were looked upon as pijgriijis ; and it was quite 
conformable to the custom of those superstitious 
tinie^ to grant to pilgrims, as holy people, all sorts of 
passes, and safe-conducts. Secondly, we must believe 
that this did happen with the Gipseys, when we 



;Coo!^lc 



132 

«ad vrith what chagrin Aventin mentitna their 
thefts and excesses, concluding thus : " Rubbing 
" and sLealtng are prohibited to otfaefs, under paia 
^ of hanging or beheading, but these people have 
" licence for them." When, thirdly, in the decree 
of the diet at Augsburgh anno 1500, all ranks of 
people in the empire are strictly enjoined, in future, 
not to permit the people called Gipseys to travel 
through their countries and distrists, nor to grant 
thenr any further * protection and convoy,' it 
certainly implies that people had formerly granted 
them such protection and convoy. Whoever 
has still any doubts remaining, may read, fourthly, 
in a decree of the empire of fifty years later date, 
a regular complaint preferred on account of the 
passports granted by various princes to the Gipseys, 
and which are, by that diet, declared to be null 
and void. All these circumstances together will 
no)^ it may be presumed, allow the shadow of 
a doubt to remain, that such letters of convoy 
have been really granted to the Gipseys *. 

* But We have more than circuinatantial proof of the eniatence 
of these lafe-con ducts, » bende« a later, but ben very pertinent, 
•rdci of the former great Hungarian count TbarW, given in the 
year l9l6, remarkable for its serious and humane contents, an 
older one, granted in the earliest age of the Gipseys, is still 
extant. It b written on paper, and was brought by those who 
ttere at Rcgenspüi^h in 1433. Andreas Presbyter copied it into 
hii six-ycBRi Journal, which was in die ponctsion of Öefeltui. 



>„l,ZDdbyG00glc 



]S9 

The Gi|)S^s* 'golden age lasted a considerable 
lame ; but wbea about half a century had etasped, 
and people began to look at them with a watchful 
eye, the old prejudices gave way. They endea- 
Toured to proloDg the term, by asserting, that their 
jeturn home wa& prevented by soldiers stationed 
to intercept them, and by wishing to liave it 
believed that ne(v parties of pilgrims were to leave 
tJieir country every year, otherwise their land - 
would be rendered totally barren. Alt tins was 
<tf no avail ; people saw too clearly, that, iustead 
of holy pilgrims, they -were the mere re fuse of 
humanity : upon which followed tlw sentences of 
banishment, we have before mentioned. 

Before we proceed to other niatters, it will ^Mi 
propn* to say a few words respecting an asSertioa 
in some writing», that the latter Gi)jsey9 difi'ev 
very widely from those who went about din- 
ing the first seven years, both with res]>ect 
to their conduct and descent Stumptj {ot 
instance, and others after him, relate, that these 
first Gipseys were very orderly and decent, did 
no harm to any one, but paid ready money for 
what they consumed ; for which purpose they 
received fresh remittances constantly: ahd at 
the expiration of seven years tbey returned home^"'^ 
Afterwards an idle desperate crew united, who, 
when the Gipseys were withdrawn, tpok their 
pMe;.aRd> .by bl^fiowg their laces, at the aame 
La 

■ ^ L:,.:,-z,;i.,C00gIf 



144 
time using the like outlandish garments, endea- 
voured to persuade the world that they were tho 
indentical Egyptians. 

This is alt related with so much appearance of 
veracity, that, at the first view, no doubt would 
seem to remain of its truth ; wherefore Thomasius 
readily adopted the whole, and founded his system 
about the Gipseys upon it : but upon closer ex- 
amination, we shall find that the statement 'is 
totally void of foundation. 

This proceeding, we acknowledge, is recorded 
4n four different annual publications ; but alt the 
four amount to only a single testimony, which 
rest« entirely upon Stumpf, from whom the other 
three have drawn their assertions. Let it remain, 
asTliomasius willhaveit, an old manuscript account 
or chronicle; it is still evident that the favourable 
description of the ancient Gipseys originates from 
the same prejudice as first produced their passports. 
And even these passports may have contributed 
to recommend the first Gipseys. They have had 
so much effect on Thomasius, that all the good 
he has given the above-mentioned primitive Gip- 
seys credit for, has been principally owing to 
them. 

When Stumpf, or rather his authority, mentions, 
with other circumstances, that the earlier Gipseys 
recHved remittances from time to time out of their 
own country, it was a necessary addition, to sup- 

L;,.:,-z.d=,CQOglc 



port the editxir's opinion ; as the reader, who wa^ 
to believe that these people did not steal, but pud 
money for every thing they wanted, would have 
been sceptical had he flot been informed before 
hand where the money came from, in order to 
provide for their necessities, in an honest way, 
during the term of seven years. 

With regard to the latter Gipseys, they were: ^ 
certainly lineal descendants from the former ; who 
were undoubtedly, equally with these, thieves, 
' cheats, and vagrants. The uprightness and honesty 
falsely allowed to the Gipseys, in the manuscript 
chronicle which Stumpf copied, might, even befort 
Stumpfs time, hax-e induced the continuator of 
this chronicle to believe, on finding his cotem- 1 
porary Gipseys lived very diiferently from what 
had been represented of their predecessors, that 
the former were not the true Egj'ptians : he ac- 
cordingly wrote down his surmise, not by way of 
' conjecture, but as positive' truth, and Stumpf, ia 
his Annual Register, afterwards quoted it as such. 
Whoever does not allow this, but considers the 
latter Gipseys in the light that Stumpf represents 
them, must be ready to answer, when called upon 
to solve, the following doubt: — How was it possi-'^ 
bte thata collection of rascals assembled in Europe, 
supposing that with respect to complexion and 
clothing they should be able to transform them- 
selves into real Gipseys, could at once acquire 



:,.;,l,z.d=,G00gIf 



196 
' foreign counfmancn, spe^k a foreign lani^aj^ 
and, both in coDstitution and turn of niiiid, becomo 
perfectly orientat; aud at the same time contract 
a taste and desire for carrion, which remain with 
them to this day? It cannot be denied but that 
some depraved people have associated themselves 
with the Gipseys: but particular instancts ar* 
not proofs of general maKims, 



i.vCoogIc 



137 



CHAPTER III. 

Freswned Origin of the Gipseya. 

It would be equally useless, prolix, and revolting, 
to reconsider the multitude of conjectures which 
the questions — " What race of people are the Gip- 
/ seys?" and — " Where are we to look for their true ' 
mother country ?' have occasioned. The greatest 
part of them are of such a nature, that they need 
only be heard, to be totally rejected. We shall 
nevertheless produce some examples, as an excuse 
for passing over the rest in silence. 

Various conjectures have been formed," and coin- 
cidences have been searched for, to obtain a solu- 
tion of these queries. Some persons adverted to 
this or. that name only of the Gipseys, without 
itttending-^ to other circumstances. Because they 
were likewise called Gipseys (Cingani), they must 
immediately derive their origin from the Grecian 
heretics, called Athingans : then again they must 
have wandered from the African province formerly 
called Zeugifaha *. Another time they are sup- 
posed to be the fugitives driven from the city 
Singara, in Mesopotamia, by Julian the Apostate : ^ 
others again transplanted them to Mount Caucasus 

* The eutern diviaion of the prcKot kiDgdom of Tuoia. 



138 
and made tbein Zochori ; or to the Palus Msotis, 
making them descendants from the Ziches*. Some< 
people imagined that instead of Zigeuner, they 
should be called Zigarcner, which they thought a 

, corruption of Saracener, and they must certainly 
be Saracens. Another writer (to return to Africa) 
cooducts them from the Mauritanian province 
Tingitane, and supposes them to be the Canaanites, 
who, being driven out by Joshua, settled here. 
StitI another brings them fj;om Mauritania, and, to 
porroborate his opinion by the name, calls them 
descendants of Chus; as he thinks nothing caa 
have a greater affinity in' sound, than Zigeuner and 

, Chusener. Herbelot judges the coast of Zengebar 
to be their mother country. Bellonius, on the 
contrary, looks for them in Bulgaria and Wallachia, 
where their ancestors are said to have lived, under 
the name Sigynner. Cordova stumbled on Ziger^ 
formerly a city of Thrace, which he assigns as their 
native soil. Some people fancied they had heard 
that the Gipseys called themselves More, and oftea 
used the name amort among one another (not 
amori, but Discka more — Get out, fellow !) and 
pow they are Amorites ! 

Aaother party, besides this or that appellation 

* Ziehen, Zi^er, cr ZincltPr, among the ancients, called in tl^e 
csrlirtt timit Achieaiii, dwelt in the coi^atqr now intuibited by 
tlteCirc 



:,.;,■ z.d=,CoOglc 



139 

fyr the Gipseys, considered their unsettled way of 
life, ur selected some particular circumstance front 
their manners, by which they decided concemini; 
their origin. Wherefore they were sometimes 
.torlaques, faquirs, or kalendars • ; sometimes the ^ 
remains of Attila's Huns ; altither times the Avan, 
-who were vanquished by Charles the Great : then 
again Petschenegers, who played their last stake in 
the twelfth century; or perhaps a mixture of all 
Jtinds of rascally people gathered together, having 
collectively no certain country, as their name 
Zigeuner indicates, signifying, ' to wander up and'j 
.down;" — for which reason, it is said, our German 
ancestors denominated every strolling vagrant 
Zichcgan.. By several writers .they have btea 

* The torlaqiin an Mahometan monks, who, under die jr^ 
tencc of holinL'Bs, are guilty of the most flagrant excesKi. Bajaid 
the Second b^ished thi'm from the Turkish empire in 14^4. Ite 
kalendars, who are likewine monks, wander about in Heathen, at ' 
the Gipsiy* do in Christian, coanlrie«. Faquirs are reli^oua 
fanatics, and rove about in Mahometan and Heathen countries 
like the mot! atrocious robbers and villains. Anquetil says, the 
Faquirs in India go pilgrimages to Jagrenat, to the amount of 
several thousands. Un their return from Jagrenat they plunder 
sucb villages anjl cities as lie in their way. They form consi- 
dcntble bodies about a mile from Jagrenat, where tbey choose 
themselves a leader, to whom they pay all the honours due to a 
general. Wjib regard to strolling and thieving, the Faquirs «ad 
Gipseys agree exactly. fi(^t this ptovct nothing concM^ng tile 
ettractioi» of {he latter, 



L;,.;,-z.d=,G00gIf 



140 

ttougdt- inhabitants of the Alps, and Pyren^; 
others suppose.them to be Cain s descendants, who^ 
«n account of the cui'se denounced against their 
•tock, have, been compelled to lead a wandering 
ragrant life. Because they pretend to tell fortunes» 
fome have supposed them to be Chaldeans, or some 
Syrian religious sect. Brodieus formed his Judg- 
sient from their clothes, in which \te thought be 
discovered a resemblance to the Roman toga; and 
thence he tm^ined they were natives «f Wallachia, 
descendants from the colony sent by Trajan into 
Dacia to keep this newly-conqiiered country steady 
in its allegiance. And, according to his assertion, 
people in Germany do really call them Wahlen (be 
myites iValacken), that is tp say Italians. 

All these ' opinions are merely conjecture; it 
would therefore be useless to proceed with the hst 
of them : but it may be proper to cite a few which 
f Mem to have a greater appearance of probability. 
Let us begin with Wagenseil. He considers the 
Cipseys to be German Jews; who, about th» 
middle of the fourteenth century, to escape the 
dreadful persecution which raged against them all 
over Europe, especially in Germany, secreted them- 
selves in forests *, deserts, and subterraneous ca- 

* The caase of this penecation was & dreadful plague which, 
in lheyrarl348, raged all over Europe. This calamity wai 
kuributcd to the Jews, who were accused of hsring poisoned the 
«elli and vater-springs^ in order to extcTmioate the Christians. 



i.vCoogIc 



141 

vents. Tu these hiding-place« they TCnuiud above 
bair a century, not niakiog their appearance again 
til) the period of the Hussites; as the Hussish 
heresy then engrossed the public attention, with 
legard tn the Jews all was safe. But not darin; 
to declare themselves, they fell oq the device of 
Saying, that their respect for the Mosaic law would 
bot permit them to become Christians, at the same 
time styling themselves, in general tenns, Egyptian 
pilgrims. Those who did not yet know what th^ 
were, nor whence they came, from their wander 
ing about ( einher zkfim) called them Gipseyft 
(Zigeuner). Tu establish this supposition respect- 
ing the origin of the Gipseys, he refers to their 

Never did any description of people experience greater oppres- 
«on and mispry than what were suffered by (he Jew» ofthat time, 
AH the gaol» and prisons were crowded with them ; they were pnt 
to the nek in every judicial court. Tie day «as scarcely long 
Cnougt) for the executioii «f the poor coDdemncd wretcltei i aae 
«rere the nights ever dark, by reason of tbo continual £m which 
were kept burning every-where, to consume them at the stake. 
Vast numbers, who had esc^«d the rigour of the tribunals, fi;ll a 
sacrifice to popular fury. They were suffocated in bogs, slaught 
teied like flies, and destroyed by other summary means. There 
was no distihclion made of age or sex : the «me unrelenting fatb 
^unued aaen and women, children and greyheaded, without ex- 
ception. To all This was added the plague, which attacked the 
Jews as well «s the Chmtiaiu. Under such circumstances, it is 
no wonder if such as could escape from a persecution so drea^ 
tul, and unmerited, n»lly did secrete themselves in the most rer 



i.vCoogIc 



142 
hn^age, which he says is a mixtut« of German 
-and Hebrew, quoting,- in proof of his assertion^ 
, near fifty, words, which are evidently Helirew. He 
.then asks. Whence should the Gipseys have gotten 
- »o many Hebrew word» into tiieir language, if they 
■ were not Jews ; at a time too when Hebrew was 

"unknown- to all other nations? This opinioa 

bears infinitely more the appearance of truth, than 
any one of those before cited. It must also have 
. . been deemed incontrovertible by the learned author, 
as he mentions it, in the introduction to his treatise, 
with great confidence, and as much self-congratu- 
7 lation as if he had discovered the philosopher's- 
stone. Notwithstanding all this, the confutation 
is so short and easy, that very few words are suf- 
ficient to overturn the whole system ; which rests 
entirely on the language :— the words quoted are 
taken from a gibberish vocabulary; but gibberish 

is not the Gipsey language What relates to the 

Jewish persecution is very just ; but all the rest are 
mere, and frequently inconsistent, conjectures, 
founded on it by the learned writer. 
~ A later opinion is, that the Gipseys are a horde 
of Tartars, which separated from the multitude 
under Timur, when he invaded western Asia, about 
the year 1401. The supposed proofs are: — First;, 
because the Mongols (Mongols and Tartars are 
liere reckoned one and the same people) are just as 
nomadic as the Gipseys. Secondly, because these 



L;,.:,-z.d=,G00gIf 



143 ; 

llave sometimes declared themselves to be Tartan J- 
ITiirdly, because the Gipsey king mentiooed by 
Aventin, whose name was Zundel or Zindelo, s 
Mongol chan, was a descendent from the great 
Zingis: as Zindelo is a very easy change from 
Zingis. Fourthly, because, amoflg the several 
states into which the Mongol empire was divided 
after the death of Zingis, one was called Dsongar, 
and the members of it Dsongari, which agrees per- ■ 
fectly with Ztngari. Fifthly, because the Tartar 
and Gipsey languages have a great affinity to each 
oUter; for during a late war between Russia and 
the Porte, a commander of Crim Tartars, by name 
Devlet Gueray, signalised himself very hiach ; and 
this Devlet is perhaps derived from Devia, the ' 
Gipsey appellation for the Deity, and may be a 
name under which the Tartars reverence any thio^ 
respectable. Sixthly, and lastly, because the time 
of Timor's expedition agrees very well with the 

first appearance of the Gipseys. ^This is an 

opinion founded on six points, and one might add, 
in further confirmation of it, that this hypothesis 
will reasonably determine how the Gipseys, such 
poor wretches in general, came to be so well stored 
with gold and silver at their first arrival in Europe, 
as Stumpf and others assert' If they were part of 
Timur's followers, it was very likely to be plunder 
taken from the people they 4iad conquered. 
Of all these grounds, that adduced -from the . 



L;,.;,-z.d=,CoOgk' 



Ml 

fimrewable eoncinreiioe of chronologieal events ba» 

Hu most w«ght, bat proves neither more nor kss . 

tihan the bare possibility of the thing. With re- 

^Kct to the first point, it is not so clearly esta^- 

bbfthed. The Tartars are herdsmen, and the quality 

of the pasture for their cattle implies a Sxed reud* 

I QQce. Gipseys, on the contrary, zie ignorant a* 

I to tending cattle, nor have they the smallest idcft 

! about breeding them. Further, whether they &nt 

Tartars, because they represent thcmaetves m such, 

or b^ve been declared such by other people ; whe* 

ther Zindelo is a Mongol chan, because his nsaaa 

U eaaiVy derii-ed from Zingis; whetlier the lanr 

goage of the Tartars bears a near affinity to tbat of 

the Gipseys, because a native ofTsu-tary was found' 

,;' whose nanic^ Devle^ is perhaps derived from the 

' 'i Gipfiey word Devla, and as that word among (h& 

' Gipseys signifies God, it may possibly among die 

Tartars a^nify something l?ke it ; — all this must bs- 

l^t b> the readers discretioEi. If sucb assertions. 

are admitted for proofs, then the Gipseys musit b» 

'Bohemians, because they ave cdled so ki Fcancs; 

Tbu9 Chifiet must have- been of Gipsey c»r Tartar 

descent, because bis name may possibly be derived 

from Deyla or Dev.let. The Franks too, aic pro* 

bahly derived from the Trojans, becau» Phara- 

mond, their king's name, may be formed froai 

Friamus. Dsougari and Zingari compared with 

cadi other \do coicdd^ ffiuept that the latter 



:,.;,i,z.d=,GoOgIc 



IS oQly the Latin tienoination givea bf the Immok 
But, besides all this, if the Gip»cys raaia be Tartan 
at all event?, whwc are the Tartars' bjoad ffccos?-**- 
Where is their courage? — Where are the zefthnV 
religious principles with wWch the Tartar» bottow 
the Deity, and, upoa occasioo, fight fot hmni\ 
Finally, with regard to language, tliis oeatrailiQtt 
rather than supports the opiuion we are fUseasM«^ 
The language of the Tartar» t* Turkish; that of',' 
the Glpseys is quite difierent, aa wJJl bs h«r«af^ 
proved. 

As these and the like arguments ?«t:h«p cwtnor 
vert the Tartar origin of thö GJpseys, w cftn we U 
little agree with Mr. Pr^', in suppoakig tWm to 
be [Tartars] of Asia Minor, from the countme» of 
the ancient Ziehen, whose name the GlptM^ am 
«aid to bear; nor with an older wHtee, Ekhanb 
who contends that they are Ciroassiaafi, >terriän| 
from their habitations by Timurs Mongol». iCiv 
Pray brings. nothing further in suppoit «f hie 'Itir- 
inise, than the fiimilarily of souiul iq ike oamtf 
Zigianer (Ziehen or properly Zygier) and Zi^cunBüt ; 
together with tiie circumstance', that tbc Idttar^^ 
peared among us soon after Timurs expedition into 
Asia Minor. Ekhard, on the contrary, who in like 
manner unites the names Zigeuner and Circass'ier — 
by endeavouring to prove that these, as possessor« 
of the countries belonging to. the Ziehen, were by 
authors indiiferently styled Circassier, Zygier, and 



i.vCoogIc 



146 
£cheb— adds moreover, that the Orcasstan com* 
plexion was a brown yeltow, exactly like that of 
the Gipseys ; that they both suffer their hair to 
hang loose over the shoulders ; that in their diet 
waA clothea they are both equally dirty ; and lastly, 
that among the Circassians, you meet with astro- 
logy* and alt kinds of witchcraft, precisely the 
lame as among- the Gipseys. ^ut this comparison, 
were it even better founded than it is, would only 
prove that you may make what you please of the 
Gipseys. Upon the same ground, they might just 
as well be supposed to be allied to the people of 
Otabeite, or any other uncivilised nation in any 
quarter of the globe. And yet the author draws 
this conclusion from it, that one egg is nOt more 
like another than the Circassian and the Gipsey ; 
and he may confidently assert, that alt who liefore 
his time have been of a different opinion, were 
mistaken. 

We ought long ago to have spoken of the re- 
puted ^yptian descent of the Gipseys; but as 
that has been a very current, and almost universally 
iccäved, opinion, it merits a chapter by itself. 



:,' Cookie 



CHAPTER IV. 

On the Egyptian Descent of the Gipsa/s. 

The belief that Gipseys are of Egyptian origin, is 
parallel with theexi^tance of these people in Europe. 
■ It arose from the report circulated by the first of 
them who arrived here that they were pilgrims 
from Egypt; and this statement has not only 
been universally adopted by the comi^on people, 
but has also, here and there, - obtained credit among 
mea of learning. Had this opinion not been 
-received at a time when every thing was taken 
upop trust without examination ; had it not been 
propagated every-where by the first Gipseys, and 
obtained the sanction of time in following ages; it 
would have been impossible for it to have gained 
such general acceptation, or to have maiatained 
itself even to the latest times. 
Till the seventeenth century, the Egyptian '( 

' descent of the Gipseys rested entirely on tradition. 
Thomasius was ■ the .first who endeavoured lo 
establish this matter on satisfactory evidence. 

■Those who, since him, have supported the same 
opinion, are principally the Englishman Salmon; 
and, lately, Signor Griseüni. Before: their vouchers 
are productd, it will be proper to mention that 



f:,C00glc 



Thomasius speaks only of the Gipseys who 
travelled about Europe during the first seven years 
after their arrival ; for he' thinks that, after seven 
years were elapsed, these, excepting a very few, 
returned home again, and after their retreat the 
present set was produced, as has been already 
^described. In this particular, he dtfiers totirely' 
from the other two writers, making the latter 
^Gipseysa distinct race of people from those who 
'first arrived. On the contrary, ' Salmon, as well as 
Griselini, consider the Gipseys ■ that are ■now 
I wandering in Europe, and with truth, as lineal 
descendants of the former, consequently bring them 
all from Egypt. 

Thomasius says: "The first Gipseys never 
" Would allow themselves to be any people but 
*' Egyptians ; asserting always, that the Lesser 
" Egypt was their mother coimtiy: arid they dc- 
" serve credit, as they were an honourable worthy 
'• set of people." One observation will he sofficient 
in reply: — Among the oldest writers who, prior 
tb'Stumpf, mention the Gipseys, not one seems to 
1>e acquainted vnth their worth. But Thomasius 
himself discovered the weakness of his first argu- 
ttient, and therefore hastens to another. "Be 
"'this as it' may," he proceeds, " tiiey were in the 
" earliest titnes, when ' doubtless somathing more 
** certain 'was' extant, always ' looked '■ upon as 
*' Egyptians: so that it does not beeomeus, Who 



l;,.;,-z.4=,CoO^Ic 



U9. , 
" live two hunürcd year» later; powHivefy to rqect. 
"what'Was at that time generally assented to." 
Our author was not aware that this kind of eäasoa-r 
ing proves too nrnoh j fov by the same, mode of: 
arguing, every antiquated wror, every, ridiculous- 
superstition, may be defended. If this be admitted^ 
Satan gets his cloven foot again, oC which modeiU: 
untwHef had bereft him. Thus, Christian Thomar- 
sius acted unJustiftabFy whoi he laid violent band» 
on witches and sorcererß, and put an- end to their 
^xistencci though credited from the highest' aatiV 
quity. - Thomasius imagines there wece othQK 
pFOofe, be^de the Gipseys' own asserttons, iiafy 
they were Egj'ptians; this supposition, hwweveij 
not on3y has nothing to support it, but is openljr 
contradicted by Aventiö, Kranz, and Münster. It 
is not autlienticated . because the chronicles uni-, 
versally m'entäön it as a saying of tlie Gipseys^ 
whenever they speak of their coming froai Egypt. 
It "is . confuted by Aventin, who - rejects theip 
Egyptian descent ; at the same time he alledgia,, ! 
that they wished to be thought from that country, i 
In his time, nothing was known concerning them,; 
but what came from rfMsrown mouths: and those 
who thought them Egyptians, rested their belief 
entirdy on the veradty of their informants. This, 
is coHfoted witfo greater certainty fmm Ktanziand: 
Münster; for these declare expressly, that evevyi 
thmg Avbich. could- be discoverad, by any other 

M S 



:, Google 



ineans than thäY own assertions, contradicted 
tather than confirmed their E^ptian descent 
Yet Thomasiu« has more proofs ; he cites the re- 
semblance between the Gipseys and the inhabitants 
of the Lesser Egypt, whence they say they came. 
' But many people lay this difficulty in his way, that 
the name of lesser Egypt is not to be found 
. in any system of geography, but is a merejuxen- 
tion of the Gipseys. He rests his opinion on that 
of Vulcanius, who looks upon Nubia to be the 
Lesser Egypt, and thinks, for what reason doesinot 
appear, that the Nubians themselves called tbeir 
country by that name. These are the similarities : 
,* — Nubians, as well as Gipseys, confess themselves 
Christians ; both lead a wandering life, and both 
are of a dark_ hioum complexion : to which some 
resemblances in shape between the Gipseys and 
Egyptians are introduced in general terms. Whe- 
ther there be any affinity in their languages he 
leaves undetermined, because, he says, he knows 
nothing about it. That the name of Zigeuner is 
' the same as Egyptian, and the farmer is derived 
from the latter, he proves in the ibllowin|[' ingenious 
manner :■ " The Spaniards — who, instead of Egyp- 
. taner, call them Gitanos — have cut off the first 
syllable. Our forefathers, who exceeded tiie Span- 
iards in the art of mangling names, have rgecttd 
two syllables, and, instead of Egyptianer, first. 
called them . Cianer, afterwards, in order to fill 



i.,C(.K-)glc 



up the chasm between i and^o, Ciganer. ' Further, 
as we, insteadof Italianer.say Italiener, wehavealso 
changed Ciganer iotoCigener; and at last, as people 
in Upper Germany are very foud of diphthongs, Ci- 
geuiier, or Zigeuner, has been produced." Now, 
if any thing'cao be proved by all this, in the same 
manner the several opinions quoted in the former 
chapter are likewise established. And yet, after 
ail, who will say, that, instead of Egyptier, 
Egyptianer, whence Cian<er, Ciganer, and thui 
progressively through all the changes, Zigeuner 
may be produced? With regard to the denomi- 
nation of Lesser Egypt, ranked under the list of 
Gipsey fables, and brought as evidence to overset 
Thomasius's system, because Egypt never was 
divided.into Greater and Smaller, it is nevertheless 
a true geographical name, though certainly nqt to 
■ be found in the treatises on geography: it bow* 
ever, appears in, the title of a Turkish emperor. 
A declaration of war, made by Achmet IV. againH 
John Casimir, king of Poland, in l6j3, begins 
with the following words; " I sultan, a king and ^ 
" son of the Turkish emperor, a soldier of the God '-, 

" of the Greeks and Babylonians king of the 

."Greater and Lesser ligypt." Tbo Gipseys have 
therefore, in this instance, been falsely accused 
pf a fiction ; but whether by this Lesser Egypt, 
Lower Egypt b<; understood, cannot be deter- 
mined. 



i:,C00glc 



Salmon Believes the Gipseys to be Mamelukes« ■ 
■who were obliged to quit Egypt in 1517, when 

■ the Turkish emperor conquered this countiy, and 
"thereby put an end to the Circassian government. 
They are rejruted to have acquired the name of 
Zigeuner, or in the Turkish language Ziaganies, 
from a Cafftain Zinganeus, who was veiy active 
in opposing the Turks. How all thia is .proved, 

■■will best appealr from his own words : " They 
" had no occasion for any testimony to shs«r they 
'" were of Egyptian descent. The blackness of 
" their skin clearly indicated from what part they 
"came. What confirms me, in my belief of this 

■" intelligence, concerning the origin of theGipseys, 
" is an act of Parliament, passed in the twenty- 
" seventh year of the reign of Heniy VIII. — that 
■" is, 'fourteen years after the victory obtained by 

'" Sclim -emperor of the Turks over Egypt — ^in 
" which are the following wofds : U^hereas certain 

•" outlandish people, who do not profess any craft 
"or trade, Tikereby to maintain themxloes; but 
" go about, in great numbers, from place to place, 
" using imidious 'underhand means to impose on 
" his Majesty's subjects, making them beheve thftt 

■^*'they wtd^staftd the art df foretelling to mm 
"flWrf women their good or ill fortune, by looking 
" in their hands, whereby thty frequently defraud 
"•peepk of their money ; likewise are guilty of tkeßs 
"and highway robberies: it is hereby ordered, that 



i:,Googlc 



" the seki wtgraiU,_ c^mmon^ calU4 Egyptians, äf 
" case they remain one month m the /(ingäom, shall_ 
" be, proceedfd against ßs thj^eve^ imd ras^lt, and 
" 9tt:the imfiartation of a^.mch, E^ptiaity he (the-. 
'^ importer) shaii forfeit, 401. . . . for every tre^ , 
. *^ pass." He then quotes another act, passod dur- 
ing^ the r^jgn of Queen Elizabeth, wherein the 
Gjps^ys are aisp called Egyptians. 

From the blackness of their skins, thereforfv 
with, the gfiiciaJ use of the qame Eg^ptiaq, S^mtm 
first draws thß inference that thay w^e really. 
Egyptians : then, because the first decree published 
against the Gipseys in England was fourteen years 
after Sflim's conquest of Egypt, th^t they \ver$, 
Mamelukes. There is not any connection to. be 
discovered in either conclusion! The Parliament 
used in the act the word Egyptian, because it was 
nniversdly current in England. Whether tlie Gip- 
seys. were Egyptians or nbl;, w^s a question of 
leamingi totally iireleyaut witlttbe inteiit^ of' 
the order; nor could it be detemiitied by any 
jundical decree. ■- ■• 

There is still less reason for supposmg theni 
Mamelukes who liad travelled from Egypt on ifs 
being taken by Selim in 1<$]7^ ,and ti:acii)g.>t^eix 
name from one of their leaders : as both th^ and 
their name were known in Europe at least a hun^ 
dred years preceding Che fall of Ciäwryj or before 



:, Cookie 



T^manbai, the latest hope of the Mamelukes, was 
hanged*. 

Griselini advances numerous reasons in support 
of his opinion, and would certunly go a great way 
towards determining the Egyptian origin of the 
Gipseys, if, as in most investigations, more did not 
depend upon the quality than the number of the 
proofs. Yet he does not suppose them to be ge- 
nuine Egyptians ; and for this reason, because the 
greatest number of those resemblances which he 
has sought between Egyptians and Gipseys, in- 

* Sultan Selim hod drawn out bU troopis kgftinst Penin, with 
tke determination, if not to conquer the country entirely, ftt leut 
to do tbem all the mie^hicf he could; for which reuoa hit 
tretneDdous army was already, in 1517, encfunprd near Aleppo. . 
Gäwri, the Circauian Suttan in Egypt, when he beari] of this 
enterprJK, being fearful thai after Selim had accomplished 
bit iotentioni respecting Peraia, he might attack him, tent am- 
baisadars, to o0er his awistance against the Peniant. Sclim 
' accepted it, and Gäwri immediately collected bU forces. As the 
two armies lay near each other, it so happened thiU some Cir- 
cassians attacked, and plundered, some loaded camels, which - 
Wen going to Selim's camp. Selim, who looked tipon this at 
anadront, instantly resdved to leave the Persians quiet for the 
present, and to drew bis tword against his ally. This he accord- 
ingly did, and Gäwri, being betrayed by two of his generals, 
wa* debited, and fell in the action. Those who escaped from the 
Httle fled to Kahfte, where they related what had passed ; and 
« general aasemb)^ being convened, they immediatly proceeded 
to the election of a new king, Turoanbey. He marched to attack 
Selim once more, was defeated, and having experienced various 



i-,CoogIc 



tended to prove the latter descended from the 
former, are not applicable to tlie question. Be- 
sides, he finds himself under the necessity of look- 
ing for foreign helps ; and what he cannot make 
coincide with the Egyptians, he meets with among 
rile Ethiopians and Troglodytes : these he intro- ' 
duces promiscuously, kneads the whole together. 
and determines the Gipseys to be a mixture of 
Ethiopians, Egyptians, and Troglodytes. This 
very circumstance, even before his reasons are con- 

revenc« of fortune, at last fell into hii hands. S«lJm was so 
chrrmed with his undentancting, that hu not only granted hini 
hu freedom, but intended to appoint him viceroy over Egypt. 
However, before thi« event twli place, people bc^n to tolk freely 
concerning their hopes, that when Selim ihould have withdrawn, 
Tumanbey, with the remaining CircaKJans and Arabians, might 
be able to drive his troops out of Egypt, and reinstate the 
Circassians in their former' dominion. These reports came to 
Selim's knowledge ; yet his conüdence was to great, thai be at 
fint did not entertain any suspicion of Tumanbey. Bat at 
length, when they continued, and even incfeased, he ordered the 
unhappy man to be arrested, and hanged under one of the gatei 
of Kahire. On which occasion, like a true barbarian, he made 
use ot the fullowing. words ; " How great my favour was towards 
" him, I have sufficiently proved ; the efiects of hu panisaos' 
" convenation, let the wretch him^lf experience." With him 
not only. ended the government of the Circassians in Egypt, after 
it had continued S8(t years, bnt, by command of SeUm, they 
were for several days left to the mercy of thci^ conquerors, who 
ticBtedl them with the greatest cruelty. 



:, Google 



rsQ 

^dcred, renders >he matter very stts|iiciouä. ' By 

^c same means, it woukl not be very dißiqult to 
tfaew that the Italians are, in part, od account of 
rtieir nastiness, Ostiacks.; in part, because of tlieir 
superstition, and admiration of magnificent edifices, 
Egj-ptians; and lastly, in part, for their dastardly 
tteacherous revenge, ChiDese. 

Griselini begins his comparisons with the dispo* 
Mtion of the Gipseys. He says, " Tiiey are in- 
" clined to melancholy, and are desperate in th« 
" fii"st emotions of their anger: — Ammianus Mar- 
" cellinus -describes the F^ptians, of his time, in 
" nearly the same terms. 

" With regard to religion," he proceeds, " the 
" Gipseys of the Banat always conform to that 
■" which prevails in the village, be it the Roman- 
" catholic or the Illyrian Greek, They have not 
" the least comprehension of either ; in which ig« 
" norance they perfectly resemble the Watlachian» 
** — except that they obser\'e the strict fasts of the 
" Greek church with more exactness. The Wal- 
" lachians separate from their wives only during 
'* the last days of the great fasts : the Gipseys, on 
•' the contrary, avoid their society from the be- 
'' ginning to the end ; also on the Ascension of the 
" Blessed Virgin, in Advent, and especially all vigUs, 
" — Apuleius, and other writers of antiquity, take 
' *' ^ticuliir notice of the Egyptian fasts,' whosy 



i:,C00glc 



157 

'• Strictness consisted chiefly in this, that tlie tnati 
" held himself obliged to refrdn from his consort's 
"bed. - 

" But, beside these solemn fasts, the Gipseys Of 
" the Banat observe a degree of temperance, and a 
*' choice in their diet, even on those days when all 
" kinds of food are permitted. They abstain irorii 
** frogs and tortoises; wherein they- accord with. 
" the Waikchians, ß'äizes, and other Christians 6f 
*' tire Greek chorch. Moreover, they refrain fioia 
*• some kinds of- river fish, viz. the red-scaled 
" bream, perch, and lampreys; of which it is 
" known that, among the Egyptians, the race of 
^ Likopolis and Ta^roriopolis refused to' tastfc 
" The Gipseys are adverse to all feathered game, 
" and particularly to birds of prey. The stork, 
«when be deigns to build on thcit wretched huts, 
" is highly esteemed by them : — one of these birdjs, 
" like its relation ibis, was an object of worsinp, 
■" with other syriibolical -Egyptian deities. 

" Of fou^r-ifdOted animals, theGipseys are most 
" fond of swine's flesh, particularly salted.^ — The 
" Egyptians likewise consumed a great number 6f 
" these creatures, though they looked upon thdr 
'" herds and keqiers to be unclean. 

" Tiie Gipseys hang up large onions in :Üidr 
" dwellings but do not cat them. — ^Besides that 
'"the Egyptians honoured them, as well as. many 
"other ve^tebles, we are informed by Diodorus 



i.vGoogIc 



" Sicvilus, that by the regulations rdating to diet, 
" observed in the different Egyptian provinceis, 
" onions were prohibited in some, but allowed in 
" others. 

" Like the old Egyptians, the Gipseys cannot 
" bear the smell of beans ; although their neigh- 
** hours, the WallachiMis, eat them with pleasure.- 

" When I was at Denta, in the district of 
" Csakowa» curiosity led me into a Gipsey hut. 
*' The 6rst object which arrested my attention was . 
" a young man covered with the itch, whose mo- 
" ther was feeding him with the boiled flesh of a 
" small snake, on a dirty earthen plate. — In the 
*' same manner the Egyptians used the flesh of 
" snakes, as the mildest and most eÜectual remedy 
" for the elephantiasis. 

" It is well known that, even to this day, fowls 
" and others of the feathered tribe are hatched by 
" art in Egypt. — I mi(st confess I was not a little 
" surprised when, in July, 1775, I went into a Gip- 
" sey hut before Karansehes, to find an old woman 
" engaged in hatching geese and ducks eggs, in 
" horse-dung. This was exactly the method of 
' the old Egyptians. 

" From all which has hitherto been produced, 

* as well as that the Gipseys of the Banat, and 

* oiherä dispersed over the rest of Europe, declare 
' themselves to be from Egypt, it is highly pro- 
' bable that they are of Egyptian ori^n. But »ec 



i:,Cx_K')gIc' 



159 

" a nearer resemblance. So long ago as in iEliui s 
*^ time, the E^ptians were famous for their |a- 
" tieuce in enduring alt kinds of torture ; and 
*' would rather expi.re^on the rack, than be brought 
" to confession ; which is a striking trait ia the 
" character of the Gipseys. When this equivocal 
" means of learning the truth, the torture, was 
" practised in the imperial royal hereditary domi- 
"- nions, several instances may be remembered of 
" the Gipseys suiFering themselves to be torn lo 
" pieces sooner than acknowledge crimes, even 
" when the magistrates had the most indisputable 
" proofe of them." 

. Thus far has been to prove the Egyptian de- 
scent of the Gipseys. What follows is against 
it; and, from the similanty of their condition, is 
to convince us that they are of ^Ethiopian and 
Troglodytish origin. ■ 

" According to the most authentic writers, the 
" Egyptians were 'solicitous to build themselves 
" convenient habitations. They lived decently ; 
" and their attention to cleanliness, in the ob- 
" servanoe of co-tain rules *f health, was so ge- 
" neral, that even the peasants^ aad the lowest 
":clas8cs of people in the nation, were no excep- 
" tion to it. — The residences of the Gipseys in the 
" Banat present a very different picture.... Miserable 
" dwellings, consisting, partly of thorns and, straw 
" packed together, and partly of holes, ten or 



divCooglc 



160 
*' twelve feet deep, dag in tlie earth. Taken Jn 
** this point of view, the Gipseys have ihorcthe 
"appearance of being related to the hordes of' 
'* JEthiopiaDS and Troglodytes. 

" Among the ancient Egyptians, agriculture was ' 
" in high esteem; as it still is among the present 
** Copts, their true descendants. — ^The Gipseys, on 
■ " the cdntrary, are the worst, and most carriess 
" farmers : another argument for their being - Etht^ 
" opians and Troglodytes, 

" These and other African hordes, employ them-' 
" sehTS in collecting gold out of the river sand ; — 
" in like manner, the Marosch, Nera, and other' 
"streams, have induced the Gipseys, to become, 
" goldwashers. , 

" An inclination for strolling, to which the 
** Egyptians were so very adverse, is the particular 
: " propensity of the Gipseys in general ; nor are 
" those of the Banat exempt from it. 

" The more artful, particularly of the other sex,' 
" go about from house to house, where they tell 
*' fortunes, cast nativities, discover thefts, and pre- 
" tend they possess remedies, to wliich theyascribö' 
" wonders and infalUble cuiw. These nostrums 
"consist, chiefly, of roots, amulets, certain small' 

" stones mostly a kind of scorite. — Among the 

** Egyptians^ likewise, such- impostors rambled op 
" and down. These were EthiojHai» by descent, 
." who carried on a similar trade. 



:, "Google 



I6l 
" From 'the last considerattons, compared with 
" the former, one would be inclined rather to de- 
" duce the origin of the Oipseys from the Ethi- 
" opians and Troglodytes, than from the Egyp- 
" tians. But what I am going to add, will make 
" itniOTe probable that they are a mixture of all 
" the three nations *. . 

" It iswell known that people of both seifes, 
" calling themselves £^yptian priests and priest- 
" esses, were, in ancient times, scattered dirough 
" Italy, Greece, and all the provinces of the Roman 
"empire: where they not only introtluo^ the 
" worship of the goddess Isis, but waiiderled frodi 
" place to plac^ begged, and professed the same 
"kinds ofingenuity in which tfaeGipseys of thfc 
*' Banati and the rest of their brethren dispersed 
"over Europe, are so thoroughly versed. Thesis 

'"" said pViests and priestesses, which' Apuleius'ironi- 
" cally calls nutgna retigionis sidera, not only 
" knocked at people's doors, in Rome, with the?r 
" sistris, but even had the skill to peuaade tht 
" common people, that to refuse t\iem alms and to 
" commit'sacrilege were «{oally -iKiaous. :Thcy 

' " even went so far as to thpcJUcB-tbose wlw slight- 
" ed them, in thc name of their igoddeas - Isis, to 

' Griselini alway* mittakä Tro^oilytcs for a .particular na- 
llotial' appcllattDn, whicVisjoit fit K^*rv w<ot to «uppotcKomadM 
-tobctheaunc.ofapa^le. 



i:,C00glc 



I,6S 
" strike them with blindness, or the tympany 
" (hydrops tympanites). — Avcntin says, the Gipscys 
" could so terrify the people in ßavaria, with the 
" like threats, that they suffered themselves to be 
** robbed by them with impunity. Likewise in 
." the Banat, the women, particularly, are heard to 
" vent the most horrid curses and imprecations if 
" they are reprimanded, or not paid for their cal- 
'**.culations of nativities, singing;, or fortune^telHng. 

" The licentiousness and immorality of tlie Gi'p- 
" seys arc extreme. In early youth, when yet 
" young girls,' they exhibit themselves, with their 
" dance^ before every person from whom they 
" expect any present ; and these dances always 
*' end in lascivious attitudes and shameful ges- 
" tures. In like manner, the ordinary women in 
" I-Syp*^ "^^*^ *** dance at their orgies, especially 
"at the feast of Bubostes, and the procession of 
" Canopus. The like scenes appeared at Rome, 
" among the wives, daughters, and sponsors of the 
" priests of Isis, agreeably to the mysteries of that 
*• goddess." 

Griselini now comes to the point; — ^Towhat 
! mation did these priests and priestesses belong? 
And when did their emigration happen P 

" It was after the time of Augustus," he says, 
*' that they began to wandet through the different; 
** parts of Europe ; in every district of which, they 
" endeavoured to disseminate tlie worship of Isis. 



i.vCoogIc 



i6s 

*' Tliey pvtotiscd istfotogy, and öthar UnA» ofttt» 
** pmtitious impositions, with all sorts of vagrants* 
** tricks, in nearly the same mannef afl the CJipsej^S 
" of our age deceive people. 

** Now- it is known that the Egyptian prifsti 
" had stated incomes, from appropriated lands ; 
"which circumstance attached them to their native 
*' ooHHtty : and hence they hated an unsettled life. 
"Neither did they demre to make proselytes; and 
" strangers, who «idied to he initiated iato the 
"rites and nrjrsterie» «f Isis« weve obliged to snb- 
" mit t» be circumcised;— thi« ceremony was m- 
*' dispensable : on the eontnoy, the hefore-men- 
" timed priesb of Isis Vandering about the Romaii 
" provinces, never meDtioned a word of circumci- 
" sion to^ their new convettB. Very sensible critic^ 
" have produced palpable evidence that they wrre 
" Ethiopians and Troglodytes^ who could fh m > e 
" easily pass for Eg3^tiaQs, as their featnres^ per- 
" SOBS, customs, uul religbn, were the same. 

*' Of all the writers who mention these cmigra- 
** tions, from Egypt, into Italy, Greece, and 
'• every part of the globe which was known itr the 
" time of the Romans, I ^11 refer only to Helio- 
*' dorus. It was very possible that, sometimes; 
*' real Egyptiaas who had been driven by misfnr- 
" tunes from their native country, or perhaps some 
" of the very lowest rank of people who had no- 
" thmg to lose, might be mixed wiüiitbesc'wui- 



, Cookie 



164 
" Aenrs. Fromthii mixturi of Ethiopiuu, Trog^ 
'' lod^^tes, and E^ptians, then, sprang a distinqt' 
" wandering nice, which partakes, in some nxasuTe, 
" of all the three nations; and from which, accord- 
'* ing to the forcgoit^ observations, we may rea- 
" sonably conclude the Gipseys of our time to be' 
" descended ; as in alt of them we discovo', some'' 
" times the Troglodyte, sometimes the Ethiopian, ' 
" and sometimes the Egyptian. 

*' That no mention is made of them in ^e 
" Hungarian yearly publications before the year 
"1417, is by no means a proof that th^ were not 
*' known long before, both in that kingdom afad 
" the Banat. If we admit the Roman coins whidi 
" are dug oat of the earth as proof that the Romans - 
" have been inhabitants of any place, widwut the- 
" concurrent testimony of any historian ; we are' 
" equftUy authorised to admit the little Egyptian' 
*' idols, of bronze, which are dug up near them 
" in the Banat, as . proof for the Gipseys, Bem^- 
"dispersed all over the. Roman conquest, why 
" might they not as well, when Dacia became a' 
" province, have gone there likewise, and propa- 
" gated the wprship of Isis, Anubis, and other 
" Egyptian deities, the same as in Italy ? " 

Such are Mr. Griselini's arguments, stated very 
diffusely, as they may be found in his works : 
but it will be evident, that what he adduces in' 
support- of his opim(»i, i» a direct proof that it 



i:,C00glc 



165 
cannot be e^blished- ' Supposing «ny person 
charitable enough to allow there is good argument 
in his far-fetqhed similarities; yet the circum* 
stance, that neitlier in the Hungarian nor in any 
otlier Journals,- iis, the least notice taken of Gipseys 
before the yeftr 1417, would overset the whol^ 
again. .Griselioi felt this himself; but what he 
urges in reply, is no answer to the objection. Nor 
is it just, .that the Roman coins found in the Banat 
should be .esteemed, without concurrent testimcmy, 
a proof of the Romans having formerly dw^lt ther«.. 
German crowns are, .as Mr. Niebuhr informs u^ 
the chief current coin in Yemen (Arabia Felix), and 
great numbers are yearly sent. thither for coffee. 
If some centuries hence, when revolutions may 
have occasioned- great changes, the said German 
money' should -be dug up, would any historical 
writer venture. to assert as a truth, that Arabia 
Felix had formerly been inhabited, by Germans ! 
But if is unnecessary to enter into a laboured 
confutation of Mr. Griselini's arguments; yet a 
few hints, with respect to his mode of proceeding, 
. strike so forcibly, - that we cannot forbear to notice 
them. 

He relies chiefly upon certain, similarities be-' 
tween the Gipseys, Egyptians, and Ethiopian^ 
without reflecting whether they are distinctions 
peculiar to these, people. Of this description the 
following are examples: — he thinks the Gipseys 



...oogic 



166 

Imust be Trogtbdytes and EtbiopianB, because 
they follow the employment of goldwashing ; these 

. latter, as well as some of the AfTican Ikm^cs, do 
äie same in their rivers which prodace gold : he 

\ tnakes thrai ^;yptiaDs, hecanse they eat swine^ 

' flesh: agün, ht concludes they mast be priests 
of Isia, because they exclaim against the h^- 
heaited, who refuse the boon they ask. Are these, 
then, distinctions which none but Egyptians and 
Ethiopians have in common with the Gipseys? 
ts it necessary to recur to the Egyptians, to find 
feop\c, beside Gipseys, who eat pork ? — Or to the 
priests of Isis, for sturdy beggars? And, with re- 
gard to goldwa8her% how came he not to recollect 
that the Wallachians also follow this employment? 
■^— And that near Strasburgh, beside other places, 
hundreds of people ^ho have not a drop of Gips«^ 
blood in their veins get their living by it? 

Further, the said Mr. Griselini, in order to 
render his system the more plausible, has made 
use of' certain expedients at the expense of truth; 
and, in spite of all experience to the contrary, so 
Ihodielled the properties of the Gipseys, as to ^ve 
them the appearance of complete Egyptians. He 
makes them by nature inclined to melancboly; 
whenas their dispositions hav^ not the least 
tincture of it: they are described as most cM- 
scientiously, nay rather supetstitiously, attached 
to religious customs; and yet, according t9 ^e 



i:,Googlc 



167 
untveratl tesdmony of other observers of tfaeso 
people, they are totally indifFerent at to every 
thing connected with rehgiou. ' He says, they arc 
adverse to 'eatiag onions ; and as for beans, th^ 
abhor them: whereas Subcer was a witness hpwf 
much they liked the flarour of both. By proceed- 
ing in this mantKT, every thing may be made to 
answer all purposes. But woe to Uie records an({ 
histories which are used in this maaoer I 

It will be seen, from what has been said mj tht 
sul^ect, that the supposed Egyptian descent c^ the 
Gipseys is very far from being proved; uotwith- 
standing it was formeHy so generally credited, 
and even is to this day. Arguipg on the fwpposi* 
tion that they originated from E^pt, care was 
taken to inform us wh^ kind of people they had 
been in that country. It is very confidently relat* 
ed, and to our great edification, that tliev* fat«> 
fathers were the same sorcerers who, in the present 
of Pharaoh, inutat^ Moses's miracles; muceover, 
that the Egyptian king set these J>e(^.lc as task- 
masters over the cliildreq of Israel, io order to 
render their labour the mote grievous : and finally. 
that these were the very murderers lempbyed by 
the inhuman Herod, to caity into cfiiect his crud 
decree respecting the. children of ^hlehem. This 
- kind of dreaming has been «arried still further; 
it having been calculated to what degree of in- 
dolence these people had accustomed themselves 



i.vCoogIc 



IS? 
in Egypt, living by the labour and sweat of others. 

■ Afterwards; when, contrary to expectation, the 
Children of Israel escaped from their servitude, 
the lucrative «mployment of these overseers, of 
course, had an end : instead of reconciiing them- 
selves to any kind of labour, they rather chose to 
decamp, with goods, wives, and children, from 
Egypt^ in hope», by cunning and fraud, to procure 
an easier subsistence in foreign countries. They 
pursued this shameful coui'se of life through the 
following centuries; and have, at last, pushed 
their excursions into our territories. 

But it is not sufficient that the Egyptian descent 
of these people is entirely destitute of proof; on 
the other side, the most positve proof is to be found 
to contradict it Their language differ» eatirely 
from the Coptic ; and their customs, as Ahasuerus 
Fritsch has remarked, are diametrically opposite to 
the Egyptian. To these facts must be added that 
weighty drcumstance, of their wandering about 
like strangers in Egypt, where they form a distinct 
people; as not only Beilohius, but many later 
writers assure us. Muratori, therefore, is not in 
the wrong, when he thinks it ridiculous to account 
them Egyptians— people having no better authority 
for this belief, than their own unsupported opinion. 
Thus, then, stands the argument, as well with 

■ respect to the derivation of the Gipseys in general; 
as in regard to the Egyptian descent of them in par- 



iivCdoglc 



169 
ticular. While many men, and amoog these KHne 
very respectable for their learnings declare the 
ori^Q of theie people to remaia an unsolved 
liddle, the opinioQ that they were not.ori^n^Uy 
from Egypt, will, it is thought, by the contents 
of this And the foregoing chapter, be thwoughly 
confirmed. Notwitlutanding the innuioerabl;. ret 
searches, the Gipseys still remain unacknowletfged 
inmates in Europe. 

It may nevertheless be doubted whether S^rin- ^ 
bame is quite right, in asserting it to be impossible 
ever to find out t^e real home of these strangers. 
After so many unsuccessful endeavour's, it is not 
vithout apprehension, though with .the best-found- 
ed hope, we venture on another trial. 



:, Google 



CHAPTEB V. 

JTie Gipsofs came from Hlndösian. 

£r ii justly asterted, that ^ne of the inoit }n&tl>bti> 
soethods ei determiniBg the wigin of the» people 
with ceFtain^, wtiukl be the discoveiy of~ m 
country where their language wa» in common use* 
The fint and most necessary exatninaäon here, 
therefore, will be, to find out the part of the globe' 
in which the Gipseys' language is that of the na~ 
tive« : and this countiy is no other tlmn Hindostui. 
But before we endeavour to prove this assertion» 
by a comparistm of the Hindostan and G,ips^ 
languages, it will be proper to premise something, 
wluch will serve as an introduction of considerable 
weight It is an article of intelligence, to be found 
in the Vienna Gazette, and comes from a Captain ' 
-Szekely von Doha, a man who was thinking of 
nothing less than of searching for the Gipseys: 
and their language in the East Indies 

*' In the year 17Ä3, on the 6th of November," 
aayi Captain Szekeiy, " a printer, whose name 
"was Stephen Pap Szathmar Nemethi, came to 
" see me. t'alking upon various subjects, we at 
*' last fell upon that of the Gipses; and my guest 
" related to me the following anecdot^ from the 
*' mouth of a preacher of the reformed churcl^ • 



i.vCoogIc 



171 

''Stephen Vali^ at Altnawh in Che oointtf of 
** Koinora.— When ^ wüd Vali studied at fh« 
** university of Lejden, he was mtiniMe^ ae^ 
" quamted witli some young Mata^Mi«, et «hom 
" tlHve a» obliged constantly to itoAy tfaeK, nor 
" can they retam bone tilt reliercd hf three otbetfi<- 
** Havug obaerred that their native knguage bort 
" B great affinity to that spt^n by the Gijpse^a, 
^ be availed himself of the opportimity to Aote 
** down, &om themselves, upwards of one thousand 
^ words, together with their »igniöcations. Th^ 
** aasuMd him, at the same time, that upon their 
" island was a tract of l^d, or province, caHed 
'* Czigania (but it is not laid' down on the nap), 
" After Vali was returned from the university, 
** he informed himself, among the Raber Gipseys, 
** concerning the meaning of his Malabar words, 
** which they explained without trouble of besitz 
" tioo." 

In this anecdote, every thing seems to happen 
by chance ; even to fihe learned man who published 
it in the Gazette, it appeared as if fallen from the 
cbuds^ and entirely oversets his system ; for he 
waa the person,, mentioned above, who braached 
the opinion tiS'- the Gipseys bein^^ Mongol' ItafMu^ / 
So much more weighty, therefinv, and une&cep-. 
tionable, are the hints it throws ou^. fut the 
discovery of the Gipseys* mother conntry, by nteaiv» 
(tf their language: 



i:,C00glc 



The oon&ideration that, according in thit aiwc* 
flkit^ the Gipsey language is declared to be Malabar, ' 
and we have pronounced it Hindostan, does not 
create any difficulty, although they arc very dtf- 
j^reat from each other. Probably the three young 
inen, from whom Vali took down his words, were 
' Bcamins* sons, whose language was that proper to 
tbe learned Bramins, or the Shanscritt But the 
affinity between this and the commoa language - 
^tokea by the people of Hiudostan, is the same 
as between pure Latin and modern Italian. It was 
therefore very natural that the Raber Gipseys ~ 
should understand, if not all, at least the greatest 
part of the words which Vali repeated to them. 

However, we do not want this cotne-off. The 
4ifficulty will subside without it; when we examine 
the connection between the Gipsey and Hindostan 
languages. The next thin^ theretbr^ is to give 
a, }ist of words from both. 



OipN;. HiodoMaa. EogUib. 

Ick;Ek £Jfc One' 

Dm; Dn D» Two 

Trin; Tri Tin Three 

Schtar; Star TKhar Four 

PantKh; Patach Paasch Fire 

3i^;ScÄ«r,jj,„Äo Six 

Efla Hefta; Sat < Sevea 

(}<^to ' Ante Eight 



iivCooglc 



/Enja; Eija Now 

Deich; Des Dot; Det 

Beich; Buck; Bis Bit 

. Trianda ; Trend» Tj« 
Siarweldesch ; I ™ , ,. • 
Saratida iTsphalj» 

P«iUcii»erdeicbi Pta- } PetgchaM 

Tschowerdesch ; 

Schoandis 
Estawerdtssch 
Ocbtovrerdesch 
Eijawerdesch ; 

Enjaadi 



[Sytl 

Syttr 
Asseli 



Nine 
Ten 
Twenq- 
Thirty 

For^ 
Fifty 

Sixty 
Seveoty 
Eighty 
NineQr ■, 
Hundred 



^Nubbeh 
r.njaaaiii \ 

Tschfel;Sch^l;Sel Souw 
Deschweischel; |£j4^^^^^„^ Thou««d 

Ö Gluno ; a Jekto Pajl» The First 

O Diiito; &Duito Dvtera The Second 

O Trito V*^'^ "^^ "^'"^ 

O Schtarto TKharta The Fourth, 



Noons Substant 

GipM«. BiBdotun. 

Twro . Wakbt 
, Bench, Burzi Sal 

. Manet ;Tachoa Meina 

Dime» Diw; Rase 

PunV; Nut 



FmrUe 
Kiiri[o 



Ani 

GoMTTO 

Jek; Otter 
Gia 



Etwar 

Tschis 

Tolad; Rykem 

Zatt 

Gvstur; Moffikj 

Tschan ; Tukra 

Adadah 



Time 
A Year 
A Month 
Day 

Night 

Morning 

An A&ir ; a "DuDg 

The Sex 

The Sort 

The Manner 

AHece 

TheNumbv 

G9d 



i:,C00glc 



Bmi 


DasKi Muiet 


An Idol 


BoUopen ; Bolibea Dune 


Tbe Worid 


Mniro 


Duinm 


Tbe Spirit 


Siei Wode 


Jan 


TheSonl 


Trupo; Tescbte 


Dbj i Ang ; Hal 


Tbe Body 


SbwetoiTtcheroBz Beheacfat ; Aamul Heaven ' 


dam t Cam i Okam Kam ; Surez 


A alar 
The Sun 


mot; Mrascha I ^«^'» 


Tbe Moo». 


Fnb»l 


Ho»ah 


The Air 


Jag; Jak iJ,^ 


' -<« 


Tire 


Pa.j; Fang« 


Ponj 


Water 


FuiBhujl-ube 

Epebu 
Bal««l, Bear 


' ] Zemin 
.B<icr;Bataa 


TbeEartb 


Tbe Wind 


Felboeschnodi 


Baddel 


A Cloud 


Felheai-faine 


Bjdachelj 


Lightening 


Tacbetogaach 


Meg 


TauQder 


BrüdluM; Bri. 


1 Bimat 


Sain 


Mraaeha : Oxh 


Kohaaaaj (M 


The Dew 


Koeddo ■■ 


Kohaaaa ; iLobol 


Fog 


Temm 


Mnluk 


TheSoa 


Akra 


Moidan 


The Field 


Hedjo 


Pair 


A Mountain 


Bar 


Pjtler; Kaja 


A HiUock 


Gere;WeTm> 


Omai 


A Pit 


Weach 


Djp 


An laland 


BaroPani 


I>eria«w 


Tbe Ocean 


Sero 


Uaibjl 


Tbe Sea 


Kupara ; Palra 


Kineri 


The Shore 


Tata, k'mj ; Foachi TKhäta 


Moiaaa; Slough 


HaniiFoljaai 


Pobara 


rr^' 


Uanji Uaaik 


Haahi Koka 


Told 


Taitaum' 


A Dike 


Flammua 


•QmiLn 


Flame 


Jangar; Angar 
Mommli ; Muukt 


Kojia 


Coal 


H battig 


light 


Sebik 


Moil 


Mud 



:,.;,i&.dbyGoogIt: ■ 



17« 



ain. 


m>l>i_,' 


**». 


TicliarjDjipIo 


Rag;Bowus 


A<h« 


Mochö 


T^jna 


Chalk 


J><ib 


BMitüii 


Sand 


Bart; Bar 


SaDka:Pytt«r 


Sto«. 


WoUw.Tcheklo 


Äta 


GUai 


Jegekoro fav 


Patter 


Biot-atoiie' 


Somiai;Simmkit/i 
Schonmakm 


}..» 


Gold 


Bip 


BxiVa 


SUn» 


Tzaster; Trascht 


Uha 


boa . . 


Tscbino 


KeUe; 


Ti» 


MMm 


JUu/m; Sjscht 


Uti 


Tziado nip 


Parrat 


«uickulnc 


Nk« 


Salt 


Lonkeien 


San 


Saltpetre 
Sul^ 


Kandini momelli 


GoiAi. 


Ctar; Tuhar; . 
Wir. 


JG„ 


Ci^> 


Jit 


Gim, 


Wheat 


Cii.'Arna 
Tztrja: Pub 


Jo« . 


Bark, 


LJBun 


GarÜi . 




Onioii 


Schach 


Kubj 


C.l>b.g<, 


Hirbil 


Mytter 


P«»^ 


Dudum 


Hulla 


AGoai« 


Hrrlmlh, 


TerJ«. 


AHeleo 


Botcrka 


Biri. 


A Cucumber 


Rük 


Oancb 


A Tree 


S^'K . 


l3--'^"" 


APeiT^ 


T«ld 


Januwt ' 


ABcMt 


Kiimo . 


A Wen» 


Bei» 


'fiusm . 


Silk 


Biriin 


rrtSf'^^?AB„ 


Jemi 


Mum 


Wot 


G»ju ; Mescho 


Schahed 


Honer 


Kirja 


. Kire.Tichdnd 


AnAltt 


Jaa i Tzua 


• J«; 


Al^niae 


Vmhm; P«ukm Fj^hi 


A Flea 



L;c,-z.d=,CoOgk' 



IT«- 



Matteku; Matt- Vw«^.-*;.' 
.fc.,Mulo JM"*«'' 
Alo Bai* 

'"'S""''''"" }''«*»"■ 

. Bischotbilo ' Ghido 

Hiretza; ReUcbmi Bnttugh 
f Tabbtrier; 
\ Tschetschlj 
Unods 






|sjr;Smg 
Bira; Hundor 



Kuttha 



Tovada 
Jaros; Garam 
Baro pens; 

OroscbSwa 
Ru 
Jäkel ^TzÜtkel 

Juket; Tscho- 

kel; Schokel 

Tschikel 
SchoKhiiTxhoKhMi Satsa; Khurr 
Papinori Baner 

Gra ; Grea ; Krej Gorra ; Ghassi 
Grattch ; Gnrrt Gorra 
GroMKf i Grusckm ■ Gorrj 
CemaaTewh Batecberu 

Guruni ; Kircnm- 
' ni; GuroDgB^ch 
Wa^uhtlo . Batschera 

J3a*m.; BaUmi i*fe.^^^'"•' 
Bakw \ M"«^! 

Bakero ; Bhara 



. [ Gaj ; Borjuko 



dohilo 
Jeschinipagri ; 



Ketschka 
Balo ; Bala 
Bikarisch kiohilo Sur 
Bal6m . Sarbatscha 



Mendhi 
[Mendbj batscha 
]BMkkrj 
PiUa;Sm 



AaEel 
A Bird 
The Eagle 
A Goose 
A Duck 
{a Dove 
An^g 
The Lion 
A Wolf 

A Dog 

A Hare 

An Ape 
Aüone ' 
A Stallion 
> A Mare 
AEoal 
An Ox 

A Cow 
A Calf 

\k Sheep 



A Swioe 
A Boar 
A Pig 



i:,C00glc 



Olp«j. 
Djaaba 
Tup 
Sag 
Kazfit ; Earicht 

Patfin 

M;Pd/ ■ -' 

Puzhum 

Poti 

TUt 

IW 

i« 

IQraliChiMli 
Kiias 

Tulo 

Saw 

Mas; Mass 

TKhero; Schtro} 
CSem 

Aok; Jaoh ; Ju~ 
kai Po; Aran 

Kan 

Nälc 

Ttcham 

'Iikammedini 

-Txhor 

Muii Moi 

Dant 
I Tichii: TlcMi 

Men 
I Summo 

Andrivik 
I Cew; Buhl 

' Kelia 

I ■ Per 

Mossm'; Mucia 

Wall; Was« 

Kuzhiio; Guzh- 
do; Gusto 



' Beng ; Meadowk 

Sarap 

Guddj 

Lakeri 

rscW 
. Pat 

Mirritz 

Bai 

Ojr 

Dum 

Lohu 

Xliad 

Kd: Mukkea 

JPanjr 
TtchjU 
Anai 
Ghost , 

'}s.r 

• Amk 

Karßn 

Nakk 

Gal 

Thori 

Dharri 

Mu 

Data 

Jibb 

GerdheQ; Gul]& 

Piteh 

Terrik 

Tschntter 

Tschatti 

Piteh 

-Bhan; Hateb 

Hatch 



[.Awngli 



A Frog 

A Snake 

A Dragon 

Wood 

The Bark 

ALeaf 

Pepper * 

The Hair 

Wool , . 

The Tail ,. 

Blood > 

MUk 

Butter 

Cheese 

Pat , ! • . 

A Tear . 

Flesh 

The Head 

The Eye 
"The Ear 

The Nose 

The Cheek : . 

A Slap on the Face 

The Beard 

The Mouth 

,A Tooth, 

The Tongue 

The Neck , . . 

The Back 

'The Side 
. The Behind 

The Breast 

TheBelly 

The Arm 

The Hand 

A Finger 



.Google 



Ohudoi Faltio 


iS?«"'^ 


IThe Thnmb 


Heroi 


The Leg 


tin 


pJi Fanw 


The Foot 


TKluaga 


Gmigi 

NoaJ . - 


The Knee 
A Fin«! NaU 
The Heart 


Sie'; Si 


s/iger 


Boko 


The Liver 


BucUipcn' 


iT 


AHacr 
A District 


Gib 


Gibah; TKhed 


A Hole 


But; Belyi 


PM 


A MnJtitnde 


Kih 


Ton. 


A Scarcity 


Lowe; Löwe 


P.j«a 


Money 


Libn 


Sere 


APouU 


Jemia; Miga 


Ko» 


A Mite 


Bidai Pjam 


PMdJna 


^Jt. 


TidMama 


Tmii Ratbhah 


Riliewela 


Eh«i . 


The Meiaoty 


S«^ 


«««,• 


The Healing 


Sung 


Awt/t 


The smell 


Sik 


Tubi 


The Taste 


lUkerpeOiRak- 
ribeo; TMhip 


}B.ti J«™,j 


The'Speech 


Ub; Alo 


Bat; Kelam 


A Word 


Mioi Lam 


No^ 


A Name 


Liel 


Khu« 


An Epiitle 


BuchM 


Keub 


ABook 


Sdiin ' 


&^ 


Colour 


Put, Pa 


Straw 


B<at. 


BukUj 


Fortmte 


Dromnazheilum 


Aheb;T1Bitti 


Error 


Sill 


Minet 


Diligence 


Meria 


Mordanj; Mot 


Death 


Bk» 


B«i 


Hnnget 


Tnizhilo 


Peaa 


Thim 


SeniioeUa' 


Para;TKliottj 


WMching 


Sowawa 


Njn; Kbab 


Sleep ' 


Mk 


l£k 


Smart 


Dt,io 


DuniDi 


TbeBrcwli 


Ghm 


EA-i 


A Cough 


Bada 


Karl Kam 


Labo«? 



i.vCooglc 



179 



MtukateUa 

TschiimebeB 

Ker 

Tieitater; Chor 

Gada 

TKhowo;TKhsbo 

TKhe; Ttchaj 

Tsckabe; Txhamo 

Ticluk 

Dade; Dadi 

Daj ; Daju ; Dajo 

Maini 

Tschawo ; SchitTS 

Tschaj i Schaj 

TscbalEronun 

Kako 

Dades Knipral 

Dades Kripen 

Pewti 

VelÄto 

RakU 

WirUws 

Werda 

Sikerwawa 

Putzjum 

Ptn 

Maogawa 

WezoeBkro 
KelUpen 
Schetra 
2'Khorori 
'Dmm 

JanguMtri i Gott' ] 
ring ; (huderin ' 
Tower; Tober 
Pil 

Be<^ari 
Tsehupni 
Tichor 
TKlti>rda$ 



Mckljm 

Zukhmj ; Gttd A Wouna 

Gurr; Hviäf A Hou^e 

Tichattr AToit; Roof 

Kam; Jura A Wife 

Lirrka A CbiU 

Ttehukaf A Girl 

TKkoima A Boy 

Ttchikerin A Vircin 

Bab A Father 

Ma A Mother 

A Grandmother 

Beth A Son 

Betl^ A Daughter 

Jamwatsch Scm-iD-law 
Tsche-t«chetabhütCoaiia 

TscbatBcha Father's Brother 

Tschatachi FaÜier*» Sister 

Rhenduh Rand A Widow 

Nok«:;Ttcbaker Mao Servnit 

TachakeriD Maid Servaat 

Gorkka^uheb A Landlord 

Seratsch ; Kfaam An Imt 



Talima 

Sowal 
mn ; JWab 
Ihriü 

Scheggar 
Kelt; NoUch . 

Serinda 



InatnicUoa 
A Qaestion 
An Answer 
A Petition 
The Chase 
A Hnntamaa 
A Game 
A VioUn 



Ttekerifi-^ Kookstj Poverty 
Mus^erJ A Voyage ;j0anie7 



Angittri 

KuUiari 

Mes;Takht« 

Üab ; Tschasj 

TtdtaMcfe 

Ttehw 

Tuhnrj 



A Ring 

AnAxiAX 

ABoard 
A Cup 
A Whip 
AThief 
ATlMft 



i:,Googlc 



Gip*y. 




E.,li,b. 


Goto : Chadum 


. Dhoro ; Krja 


A Sword ; Dagger 


Pieisserduin 


. Masuri 


A Reward 


Tschatscho 


JnaaF; Sjera 


Right 


Paro; nirda 


Bharr;'ßirz 


Weight : Burthea 


Tchamoben 


Tachum'a 


A Kiss 


Dori 


Suilj i Fjtha 


A Baod 


Ma iru ; Maro 


Rut] 


Bread 


Jaro ; Aro 


Ala ,' Moidda 


Meal 


Gaböa 


Konna 


Food ; Eauble» 


Kjl 


Mukkm 


Butter 


AqtVi.-Bajali 


Sya 


Tbe Prince 


Ra»j 


Ryi 


The Princess 


fi«z 


Raz ; Surdari 


Tlie Principality 


Buklo 


Koluff 


A Castle 


K uro ben 


Junero 


War 


Kutwnaskro 


Gardj ; Tacholdar A Warrior 


Harmi ' 


Hattiar 


A Breastplate 


Piischka ; Banduk Sandak 


A Musket 


GaitcGal; Jegag Gauw; Basti 


A Village 


Tombun 


I'mbur 


A Drum 


Kandifd momelli 


Gewlm 


Brimstone 


Tka 


Dhuah 


Smoke 


Paka 


Bo,u 


The Wing 


Palmande 


Miisaka 


Tbe Rear 


Komm ; Maamcli 


Murd; Manuich 


Man, Mankind 


JammadüT 


Surrdar 


Commander 


Kluaturi 


Takkor bar . 


A Cloister 


Kantrri; Kanabei 


ri Mustzam 


A Church 


hba ' . 


IstMa ; KuterJ 


Apartment 


Skaurnin " 


Tschukire 


A Chair 


Kambana 


Guntha Giiittal 


A Bell 


Gäwr . 


K,br 


The Grave 


Doga ' 


' T.chj, 


The Matter 


r^anikek 


' Qaotsch-netsch 


Nobody 


Sohut 


Sirrka 


Vinegar 


Ker; Baufc 


Havelj ; Emarat 
Tschahj ; Kill 


AnEliace • 


Klidin 


A Key 


Schoste 


^' Petscbamma 


Drawers 


Koto A 


KuTti 


A Coat 


Kuni ; r 


Man ; Kejasa 


A Measnr« 


KutKhahu \r 


" Kiaeh 


Potter's Clay 



.Google 



Oq»V- 


Ilindt^sB. 


fqsllili. 


Güji 


Go^ 


A Sausage 


Hoi 


AngurjSchrab 


Wine 


Gereta 


Karamttti 


Chalk 


Sapuni 


Savin 


Soap 


Kammawa. 


Guna 


Accusation ; I 


Gono 


. Kissa 


A Knapsack 


TÖrjFar 


Purr;-Por 


A teathet ' 


Madjho i Matzlir 


i MudkJ 

Adjsctives. 


A Fly 


Gip«y. 


Hindern. 


E^gni. 


Schoker 


Jssekta; Hakabat Respectable 


Furo 


Puraml ; Suda 


Old 


Dumino 


Pagia 
Tschinta 


Simple 


Prinjerdo 


Known 


Nango 


T^enga 


Bare 


Naailalach; Erio 


Budd ; Khtab 


Wicked 


Bulhilila 


Tgcti^Km 


Broad 


Duber; Jdtäto 


Duara 


Double 


Sano 


Scham -.Viaii. 


Thin 


Tachori ropra 


Kambu^ht 


Miserable 


T^chimaster 


Ekara 


Single 


Netko;K«iKd 


Eternal 


Latschil«; Wio^ro Juta 


False 


Tamlo 


Nerassa 


Dark 


Piro 


Kalasch 


Free 


Zelo 


Sumutscha 


Entire 


Baro 


Bum 


Great 


Latacho 


BaJa 


Good 


Tsckorero 


Budd-««-e( 


Ugly, Hateful 


Pral , , 


Uoscha 


Hrgh 


Boko 


B»i<i . 


! Hungry , 
Crooked 


Baugo 


iSe»*a,Tar» 


Tikno ; Tigno i 
Bango 


re«g»a 


• Short 


LinKra : AitacR 


Lame 


LokesjBeiwJbukarDjiai ©aixwjtttka Slow 


Sorlo 


Jeura 


Powerful 


Kindo 


Bin«« 


.Wet. . 


Nevo . 


»«» 


■ New 

OS 



:,.;,■ z.d=,CpOgk\ 



Oipey. 
Barw«lIo 
Kalo ; Kala 
MitBchach 
Bkarakilo 
Gudio 
Gor 

Merla ; Mojas 
Sehukrohilo 
Gojemea 
But 
Perdo 
. MasBob 
Tuha 

Tatto ; Tatip 
Farna 
Dur 
Naneletkckfi 



Matwir ; TaliWrr 
Kala ; Sjah 
Tik 
Barri 
Mitha 
Gehtra 

MtM.Whakka 
Sukka 
Kafiä 
Boti Fatta 
Ptirra ; Bharra 
Kaberdar 
StUscka- 
Gorm 

Saffed ; Vjela 
Tschaura 
TBcbimmero < 



Rieh 

Black 

Severe 

Heavy 

Sweet 

Deep 

Dead 

Dry 

Arrogant 

Mach 

Full 

Watchful 

True 

Warm 

White 

Far 

Tough 



Giptty. 

Hiokerwawa Mal-kurraa To esteem 

Wia« PontschoB To arrive 

Kovokardai Lugeanna To entice 

^hindiu ScAtna-kurrtta To charge 

Pekgum Tamburme-puAAdunaTo bake- 

Tte^l Hjlna To shake 

Mat^awa Marina To beg 

Gohena Bjramet'kurroa To cheat 

Päkjum lurauna To break 

Bündopeu Banana To bind 

Lubekirdaspai Zanakari-kurma To commit adultery 

Pral Derkarbniia To be poor 

Pretterdum Daniaa To threaten ' 
Tichen^ia stele AVkatn« To behead 

Perdo BAurraa To accomplish > 

Stildiim Pukfcema;6ojena To seize 

Gana ; Kia Kauna To eat 
AndrMusterkordoZiuiir; Luggauoa To fetter 

Nauk TWAttfM To flow 



>„l,ZDdbyG00gIC 



Jarawe 

MutertDawa 

Bango 

Getschaha 

Ghas 

Nazh 

Kiodjelle 

TschumedeU 

Savva 

Muk 

Schinawa 

Tscharava 

Deletschedom 

Gochoben 

Kerla 



Lawa 
Nttbt 

TKhikateh 
Barrakro 
^ Seaoelowisa 

Dia« brischendo 



I fear 
Jirma; Dtrrhuna To fear 
Mutna To make water , 

Lingra hnna To halt (go lame) 

Jauna To go any-where 

Jtam-kurrna To cough 

Schegar-kurma To hun( 
Mul-Tena To buy 

TKkumauna To kiss 

She kisses 
Hussna To laugh 

- Muk}aet-V}irra.a. To leave 
Jjna To live 

Tschatna To lick, 

Sulah-huna To lie down 

Jul bolena To lye 

Kurrna To make 

Siwena To sew 

hena ; Pukkerna To take 
Nomdena ' To name 

Tschi'kurma To sDeeze 

He sneezes 
BdrrefjcA-kurrna To boast 
Djwana huua To be inad ; toiave 



Birrsna 



Tsatschobeti 

Songatea ; Sung 

Penoawa 

Tschinnawa 

Giuaawa 

Limmaugi 

Zamander 

Zhioirer 

Knrobea 
Beeiawna ; Bezh' 
Ttchor 

Mujat; Miilo 
^ongna ■ 



Ginna ; Tikna 
Jnsaf dena x u neai 

ÄimW«a;BokurmaTo smeU 
Kabena ; Boleoa To say 



To rain 
It did rain 
To reckon 
To right on« 



Karat'kumia 

Guwena 

Kurranna 

Jcdda-kurrn« 

Galljdena 

Uraunft 

Kaasa-kuima 

Bahetna 

Ttehwe-karroM 

Muena 

Duntena 

Lena 



Tos 
To sing 
To provide 
To (livide 
To scold 
To shoot 
To slay 
To Bit 
To steal 
To die 
To seek 
To carry 



.lOoylc 



GiW- 


Rindoitui. 


EngKib. 


Luno 


Zumma-kurma 


To marry 


Kuroben 


Mnrna 


To meet 


Piava; Pi 


Piena 


To drint 


Pyro 


Puiand 


To grow obsoltte 


Eatsakerjl 


Benschna 


To sell 




TichinAa 


To know 


Me tsckana 




, I know 


Tzawari 


Jadu-kurrna 


To bewitcli 




Dekkna 


To see 


Me dik'kaha 




I saw 




Suna 


To hear 


NescAwTM-fe 




I do not bear 



Example how the two Languages decline. 
1. Without being joined to an Adjective. 

SixGi^LAB Number. 



TbeMu 

ONim 

ftom, uith the U 



Plural Kdmbeb. 



Gadse 
Gulieagen. 

Gaoz- 
OOeAze 



SiNOULAB NvMBEB. 



OftheTabl* 

To (he Table 

Th«TaUe 

O Table 

front, «kh die TMt 



Plukal Number. 







W3 




Kafidjmg. 
KaBdJB 
O Kafiüja 


-Mewi. 
'MescM 


Eoglisb. 
To Itie Tshlei 
Tlie Tables 
O Tables 
froui, with iheTablsi 






2. With aa Adjective. ! 






Singular Number. 


Ban bate 

BaH ballt 

BaribalU 

BaraUU) 

OBambaM. 

BaribaUuer, 


biliu» 


Burraiur 
Buna tarka 
Burra Kiiko 

o'bu™'«« 

Burr» .un« 


The great He« 

Ö1 Ibe great Bog 
To (he gri-at Hog 
The great Hog 
O great Hog 
fmiD, wilb tbe gcaat HSG 






Plural Number. 


BarabaUn 
Baribalen 

Baribalcu 
Banl balcn 
Bar« balen 
Bar balender 


balnin 


,' Butreiore 
Burre anreki 
BuirenireiL* 
Bnne .ure 
O Barte iure 
Burro iuieK 


The great Hogi 
Of tbe great Hogi 
To the great Hogi 
Tbc great Hog> 
• great (logs 
Iraiiii vith tbe great Hogi 



RcH«Bi L Thoi« fTlUblei wtiicb, in liie oblique caaei, are piinted in 
Italics, are tbe aitidt. In the Gipsey, ai well u in tbe Hindodaa 
language, the artide ii not jriacijd before the noun, but affixed behind - 
it, and that is the >ale indicaiion of th« cate of a nouD. la tbe Gipwy 
tongue, the article of (be oomioative case ii k or i j in tha Uiadattan. 

"'"'' . 1 . , 

KtHasa IL The Gipae; langnag«, as well n the Hindoatan, hat only 
two genders, the masculiiK and femtniofb fljoie iKun) which end iaf. 
are, in both languages, temlnine, and all tbe rest maKuUoe. Both, 
languagei change the maacolmc into the ttminioe gender, bj' pnltipg 
a i or an i for the te 



g™«,, 


Baia, tbe Prioce, Rani, tbe Pcinoti 




SoHb Pkonounb. 




I. I: Me; Me, Mo. 




Singular Number. 


Me 

Mmbi ; Ma> 

Slaage i Man 


He i Mo I 
Merra; M«U Orim 
Mejko ToiD. , 
M^ko He 
Mq«. fro» Me 



lie 



Pldbal Ntfmiek. 
Atom; BIn Bnam K 

Aaeiohl Hnmmimi Hmka O 

* — g»j Hen Hniaako Ti 

i Hen Hnmaun ; Honko V 



a. TbM: Imi T».. 
SlTieVLAK NUMBBS. 



Ta 


T« 


noUjiUi 


T«n« 


TkkciTaU 


I^ko 


T^UBiTst 


Toiko 


on 


OT» 


IHMiUiTittr 


Tbm 



Of Am 

TbM 

OTboB 

tannw 



Fldbal Nbmiik. 



TwacBgid«) TonkCB Tnmk« To Yon 

1W«»i Taae Tamam ; T^vko Yoa 

Q-nm« OTbb OYoit 

TipMMlwiTWmaaM Tum« ftMB,iriaVM 



a. a. &•: }«b; UmA. 

SlMflVLAK NCMBBB. 

J*iU OfHii 

JmU« To Hh 



&.>. 



SiMOOLAB MvilBEB. 



.'.oogic 



187 



I*i.u&AL Ndmsx%, common to both Genders. 



Hin 
' Med 

Mdip 



Jane 




OlThem 


Jiuiefca 




To Them 


Jnae 




Them 


Juane 




frDoiTfaem 


Mira; 


H«ri« 




Miri; 


Hem 




MMoJiM. 


fbM««. 




Hern 


Merri 


ofuj 


HcinU 


Herriki 


' Mc.r>ko 


Memko 


ToMj 


Ittm 


Mem 


&, 


OMem 


OMeiti 


Mcnu> 


Uem« 





«. On: Huo; 








Uuii 








SlNOULAB NUMBBR. 




U*n> 






Ow 


H>ri 


HiimnumlB 


BmomurikB OfO« 


Mirige 






M.ri|. 


Hamm.». 


Humnnni 


Our 


Ol£n 


lUd O Hunuxam 


OHaniDUii O Omr 


Ibddu 




HtuonuniK 


fibmOni 




A Thji ■Hm; 


Ton 






' Tirif 


lad 






SlNOPLAB KUMpEB. 




HdKKliw. 




FeoiiiM. 




Tin 


■nii Ttrr. 


Tern 


^ 


Tai 


Tank* 


Toiik« 


Of Thy 


Terige 


Temko 


Teiriko 


To 1*7 


l-^ 


Ton 
OTU OToi* 


Tori 
OTerri 


Oliiy- 


Teriö« 


Tenue 


TmiM 


ftx>m.^T 


T«liM 









7. Yaw: Tnmuo; Tnmniun 
TmnKTl j Tommam 

SlNOTLAS NCMBEB. 

Tamara Tuiari Tommarra Tommtnl Your 

Tmnaii Tummanka TtuniMiTika QfTonr 

TuDurig« Tumnumko Tummarriko To Yonr 

Toniuigc Tnmawfia Tummaxri Yoai 

OTnmani OTWaii Tamnum OToraniini O Your 

t;Tmnaii*e Tunmacraie Tiutunaniie fnim,wiÜiVmr 

1. Who? Kokm? Giptqs Koonl 



186 
Exsmple« of the conjugation of both Languaget. 

I am : Me Uta» ; M« Hej 

Present. — Sinovlar Number. 

Gipwjr. ITiDdiMlia. Engliafa 



MeHmtiiKom Sinjom He Hcj ; Mem Ho ; Hota Hot! 
Tu Hal Siojel Tj Hej ; Tern H«e ; Hot. Hoc 

Job m ^1 VWeh Vej ; Wo Hu ; Hon Uoti 



Plural Number. 

Men Ham Siniui Hnm He) ; Haiii Hatm ; Hote Hatia We are 

Tume Han Sinjaa Tum Hei ; Tom Ho ; Hole Hoda Ye are 

Jole Hi Sinja Jnne Hei ; W* Hmb ; Mots Hot» Tbe; a 



iMTBBrKCT.-— SlNOULAR NuMBER. 

Me Boa ; Meni Tli* Hü I «m 

Tu Hua ; Tem Tba Tbi Ttaon «ai< 

tlweh Hua ; Vital Tha Thi He wm 



Plural Nvmbbr. 

Hnm Hue ; Hwa Tbe Thia We we 

Turn Hue; Tom The Thia Ye we 

Inne Hue ; W« The Thia Thej » 



Perfect. — Sinoqlae Number. 

Me Hoatba I hare bees 

Tu Huatba Thouhtalbeen 

Vweh Hoatba He bwb b«en 



Plural Numbeb. 

Hen Snjaaahi Hboi Haatho We Iwre bee« 

Tame Ktijinahi Turn Hnathe Ye ban b«ca 

J«le Koj« Jnne Haatb« ThejUwebeen 



i.vCoogIc 



FdTUSS. — SlMODLAB NuMBCIt. 



Ifc-0-. 
MUU 


Me Hop 
TaHu» 

■• t-ekHug. 

PluHAL Number. 


IduUbe 
Thou ahalt be 
He*hatlbe 


Men 0«s)m 
TunteDiia 
3th Qweaa 


HumHugt 
Tun Huge 
Jnne Huge 

Ihfinitite. 

' ' Hnqs Is be 


WeibonW 
YeiAoUbe 
Tbej aball be 




Tonil«; do! Ktrj«; Kuim«. 






PbESENT. — SlNODLAB NuMBEB. 


MeKetel 
JobKeicl 


Me Kurrta 
Tu Kamt 

Uweh Kuitls 

Plbeal Number. 


I male 
Tbou make:* 
HemakMh 


OnKerde 


Hum Kunte 
Tnro KuiTte 
JnoeKume 


Wemtkc 
Yenwke 

The; ma* 


Impsrfect.-^ingulab Numbeb. 


MeKcriMi 
T« Ker/eJ 


Me KitrrtBlhü 
Tu Kurrtatht 
U««b Katrtsth. 

Plubal Numbeb. 


I did make 

Thoudidwmaio 
He did make 


Sd.0 Kerjom 
Ton.™ Ke.j«B 
Oq K«rde 


Hum Kuntetbe 

Tum Kuniaibe 
June Korrtotbe 


WedidnuA. 
Yedidmaia 
They did n>k« 



The comparison thus far will, it is presumed, be 
Bufficient to convince every person of the truth 



19Ö 

of the position, that.the Gipwy language is really 
that of^indostan. Let the reader look over the 
catalogue ouce more, and it will appear, on the 
laverage, that every third Gipsey word is likewise 
■an Hindustan one; or atill more, out of thirty 
Gipsey words, eleven or twelve are constantly of 
Hindostan, This agreement is uncommonly great: 
it must at the same -time be remembered, that the 
I words above communicated liave been learned from 
■ the Gipseys within a few years; consequently, at 
a time when they had been nearly four complete' 
centuries away from Hindostan, their native coun- 
try (as we may now assert it to be), among people 
who spoke languages totally different, and in' 
which the Gipseys themselves conversed. Under 
the constant, and so long continued, influx of these 
languages, their own must necessarily have suffer- 
ed great alteration ; more especially as they are a 
people entirely ignorant, without eitlier writing or 
literature. One foreign word after another must 
have crept into their language ; consequently, by 
the frequent use of such words, the Gipsey word 
or the same signification was more rarely used, 
and by degrees lost from their recollection : by 
which circumstance the original composition of 
theirianguage became completely deranged*; which 
is the reason why, as any person may convince 

" For a coroparUon of the Gipsry language at different period^, 
see (A), Appendix. 



i.vCoogIc 



191 

faimself by mspection, various languages and idiom» 
— Turkish, Grecian, Latin, WalUehian, Hun- 
garian, Sclavonian, German, and others — make 
part of the foregoing vocabulary. The word rfme^ 
man, is Coptic; with, perhaps, a few more It 
does not appear that there is so much Persian in 
the Gipsey language, as has been generally ima- 
gined ; aqd even what there is of it they may 
have brought with them from their native country, 
as many Persian words are current in Hindostan. 

After all thest reflections, we ought rather to 
wonder that the number of Hindoetan words in 
the Gipsey language is so considerable, than to 
require it should .be greater, in order to furnish 
sufficient proof of the Hindostan language being 
the Gipseys' mother tongue. 

But we have a right, from the agreement 
which appears in the catalogue published, to con- 
clude the affinity is much more intimate. The 
idea hitlierto adopted has been that, among the 
Gipsey word» quoted, all those of the Hindostan 
language, answering to the annexed meaning, 
appear, which are still extant in the Gipsey 
laogu^e. But this is certainly by no means the 
case. It will be recollected, from the first part, 

■ how great 'a secret the Gipseys make of their 

■ language, and ho\v -auspicious they appear when 
any person wishes to learn a few words of it. 
Even if the pipsey is not perverse, he is vciy 



i.vCpogIc 



190 
inattentive ; and is consequently likely to answer 
some other ratlier than the true Gipsey word. 
Under such circumstances, it is very possible, nay 
even probable, that in the foregoing catalogue 
i there may many words be inserted, for whick 
■ true Gipsey, of course Hindostan, words might 
be found ; but that the Gipseys when enquired 
of, either from levity or by design, did not declare 
them. 

Further, it is not all absurd to pronounce, that 
there remain more, or at least different, true 
Gipsey words among those residing in one country 
than another. And if, at a future period, some 
person should, as an experiment on the above 
catalogue, examine a second or third time parties 
_. of Gipseys in different countries,' and compare the 
words obtained with those already delivered, the 
catalogue would certainly receive a considerabte 
augmentation in favour of our hypothesis. 

Finally, we must consider the Hindostan lan- 
guage itself. This, it is true, is fundamentally 
the same all over Hindostan; but, like every other 
language in the world, has different dialects in the 
various provinces. The eastern dialect, spoken 
about the Ganges, has different names for some 
things, and different inflexions of some words, 
from the western one spoken about the Indus. 
There is, besides, a third, varying from both these, 
viz. the Surat dialect, which has a number of 



i.vCoogIc 



191 
Malabar atid other words mixed with it. To this 
must be atlded, that in the Hindustan, as well aä 
in erery other language, there are often several . 
names for the same thing. The particular dialect 
bearing the closest affinity to the Gipsey lan- 
guage, as' will appear hereafter, is the western,» 
and perhaps more especially that of Surat. Had 
this therefore, or the western one in general, been 
the standard of the above comparison; and had 
"we not, for want of words in these dialects, be^ti 
obliged frequently to have recourse to the eastern 
one, spoken in Bengal ; or had we, even in the , 
latter, been able to obtain so many words, that 
where the Gipsey, from not knowing any . 
more, could only give us a single expression» 
we might have produced, not one or two as at 
present, but all, or at least the greater part, of 
the synonymous appellations : we should infallibly 
in this manner recover, in the Hindustan language, 
'many a Gipsey word, which even the learned are 
unable to derive from the European or any other 
language, and yet have as little appearance of being 
Hindostati. With respect to the construction 
and inflexions of the two languages, they are 
"evidently the same. 'Jliat of Hindostan has only 
, two genders; the Gipsey the same. In the former 
. every word ended in j is feminine, all the .rest 
masculine ; in the latter the same rule is observed. 
That makes the inflections entirely by the article, 



i.vCooglc 



IM 
•dding it at the end of the word; the Gipsey 
language proceeds exactly in the sarae manaer. 
Finally, likewise, bating a trifling variation, this 
identical similarity ts evident in the pronouns. 

So much far the language of the Gipseys. As 
this is indubitably Hindustan, it would be suffi- 
cient of itself to prove the descent of those people 
from HindostaD. But we shall now proceed to 
other grounds, which, united with the proofs from 
the language, will leave us less reason to doubt 
concerning this matter. 

That the Gipseys, and natives of Hindostan, 
resemble each other in complexion and shape, 
snd are equally timorous and cowardly, is undeni- 
aole. But we shall pass over these, together with 

' some other circumstances; as, perhaps, neither 
the one nor the other are such distinguishing 
marks as not to be met with among other Oriental 
people. 

The name of Polgar, likewise, carries some 

^ weight with it, which we find among the Gipseys 
in the earliest times, before they began to change 
the names they brought with them for those used 
in Europe. Polgar, as we may remember, was the 
name of the leader who, in the year 1496, ob- 
tained a safe-conduct from the Hungarian king 
Uladislaus II. by virtue of which he, with his 
horde, consist! fig of twenty-five tents or families, 
liad the Uberry of travelliDg about where he pleased. 



i:,C00gfc 



m 

Üliia name Polgar originates in India,, where it.if 
the appellation of a deity. presiding over macri^!;es 
and matrimonial concerns: the Indian? are very . 
<fond of bearing this ttaoie, as well as. the names 
of their other deities. , 

' In reciting the employments of the Gipseys» ^— 
their smith's business was mentioned; when iE 
was remarked, that their anvil is a stone,. and 
what more implements they use consist in,a pair of 
hand-bellows,, a pair of tongg, a ha^ipier, a vise, 
and a file. With such, a portable apparatus tl»e 
travelling . Gipsey wanders from. place tp .pl^ce. 
We will compare this acqount with what. Sonnerat 
relates of the Indian smiths : the follpwing aite 

t his own words : " The smith carries his tools, , his 
" shop, and his forge, about with him, and \vork8 
" in any place where he can find employment: he 
'-' erects his shop before the house of his employer, 
" raising a low wall with, beaten, earth, hef.>re 

'" which be places his hparth; behind. this, \pa!l he 
*' fixes two leathern bellows, which his apprentice 
" blows alternately, to keep up the fife.. , He Ims 
" a stoi^ instead of an anvil, and his whole appa- 
'*' ratus is a pair of tongb, a hammer, a beetle, 
** and a file." Tl}e most striking circumstance 
relating to this coincidence is, that bath Gipsey: .,.. 
and Iridian should use . the same kind of haod- 
bellows, and both have exactly two. . As the 



.Google 



19$ 
. iftpt-^atlce Works these for the Indian, so does Ute 
wife or one of the (hildren for the Gipsey. 

What is asserted of the young Gipsey "girls, 
TiUnbUng about with their fathers who are must- 
dans, dancing with all kinds of indecent and lascivi- 
ous attitudes and gestures, to divert any person 
who is willing to give them a sinall gratuity for 
' 'so acting, is likewise perfectly Indian. Sonnerat 
eonfinns this also.—*' Surat is," he says, " famous 
" ftir its dancing girls. These young 'women , 
" deyote themselves entirely to the worship of the 
**-Gods, idrhom they attend in the processions, 
'" dancing and singing before the representations 
** of them. The handycraftsmen generally destine 
" the youngest of their daughters to this service, 
" and send them to the pagoda before they come 
'*' to the age of puberty. There they have dancing 
*• and music masters, with persons to teach them 
*' to sing. The Bramins form their ytmng minds, 
"and deflower them; in the end, they become 
*' common prostitutes. They then join in €om- 
" panies, take musicians with them, to entertain 
** «dy-body who chooses to «ngage them, witl^ 
" musite EBid dancing." Sonnerat speaks here like- 
wise of the wanton gestures of these dancing girls, 
of which he has given a drawing ; and «nds his 
description thus : *' The blinlung of thär eyes— 
** half open^ half shut — and the negligent sink« 



:, Google 



»7 
'*ii^ of thfir bodies, to tte most hngimhiifg 
" music, shew tfaat thnr vbefe ^me bMaClies 
*' nothing but lasciviousness." 

Fortune-teilmg is practised alt over the east ; but 
the peculiar kind professed by the Gtpsey«, vi«. 
«Uranangp—constantly referni^ to «hedier the 
parties shall be rich or poor, fortunate or unhafpjr 
nt marriage ; whether they shaH. have »lan;^ or 
&w children, &c. — ii no-where met with but ia 
India. The follomag instance will evince, how • 
perfectly Gipseyish it is : " It once happefted," 
says fialdxus, " that the Rajah Khans made his 
" appearance before the iahabitants ; when being 
** given to miderstuid that an experienced KraiwHt 
" was arrived, he ordered him to be brought b#f »re 
*• him, and said—* Narret (that wta his name), 
*' iook at my daughter's hand, and inform -me 
*' whether she will be h^py or uiiß>rtunate, poof 
' " or rioh ; whether she will have many or fkvt 
" children ; if her life win be long or short : speak 
" out freely, and conceal nothing.^ The Bramin 
"having looked at her hand, teplied, 'May H 
" please your Majesty, according to the indication 
" of these lines, I read thn»— She shall bear seMett 
"children, vit. six sobs »id a daughter; the 
" youngest of whojn shall not only deprive yow 
" of your crown md empire, but likewise of your 
" head aiTd life, and afterwards pbce lumstftf in 
PS 



;l\ Cookie 



198 
"your «at.'" ThU method, BakUeus adds, <*f 
looking in .the hands, is very common amoag the 
heathens. 

The excessive loquacity of the Gipseys, as well 
. as. their very advantageous natural qualities, which 
.have been before noticed, are likewise distinguish- 
ing characteristics of the Indian; besides, the 
very name Zlgeancr, or, according .to a broader 
, way of pronunciation, Ciganen and Tchingenen, 
is the appellation of an Indian people, living at the 
mouth of the Indus, as mentioned by Thevenot. ' 

Another striking intimation of the Indian de- 
scent (^the Gipseys, is the partiality of the latter 
fori red colours, or saffron: in like manner the 
Brftmin performs all his religious duties in a white 
dress, without the least mixture of any other co- 
lour. On his return home from these functions,- 
fae changes his white turban for a red one. The 
common Indians also prefer this colour for their 
little round caps: and these last^ especially on 
holidays, make a double deep yellow stripe on their 
foreheads yith fat, saffron, and sacred cow-dung. 
The Bramins make the «ame stripe with red, as 
a mark of pr&«minenfx. Again, the- Gipseys. as 
Twiss assures us of those in -Spain, never inter* 
marry with any'peoj^e who are not, like themselves, 
of Gipsey extraction; which puts us strongly 
in niind «f th^ Ituliab castes. 



:,.;,i,z.d=,GoOgIc 



IflO 



CHAPTEB VI. 



The Gipset/s are o/the Caste called Suders. 

Wr come now to thcposition we hoped to sub-' -|- 
stontiate^ v'iZ4 thattfae Grpseys are of the lowest 
claas of ladians^.nahiely, Furiosi or, as they are 
eaHedin Hindostao, ÄMfer*. ■ ;u c" 

The whole gre^t nation, of 'Zadtaos i» known to 
be divided into, füur» rank» or 'stoaks,, which- arc 
ealird by a Portagupe ftame, castes, each of which 
has its own partic«^' subdiviüona. < Of these? 
castes, the Bramin is -the first : th& second con- 
tains the Tsekeckterm (ir ■ Setreas : thei third jcon-! 
gists of the Beit or fVnitmr* : . the foutth^ iis : the 
caste of the just-mentioned Suderä; who upon the 
Peninsula of Malabar, where their; toadition is 
the same as in Hindostan, are call^ Parias or 
Parier. 

Tlie relative siteatkm of these four castes, and- 
the grounds of their difference, rest on the Indian 
feble of the Creation. This relatSes, that the God' 
who created Brunaa^ ordained that the Bramia' 
shoubd proceed Qut of Bruma's mouth ; the Tschedi*' 
tcrie out of his arms ; ' the Beis out of his legs ; and' 
the Suder fror» his rfeet. As Snima afterwards ' 
»Uotted the employments of each of these stocks^ ' 



i:,C00glc 



«10 

be appmnted die first to sedc after kncnriedge, 
to give imtnictioD, and to take care of religion; 
tile second was to serve ia war; the third was, as 
well a« the BraoiiD, to cultivate sdenc^ but to 
attend particukuiy to the Ineeding of catde and 
agriculture :' the caste of Suders was destined to 
, be subservient to the ftamins, the Tscbechteries^ 
«ad the Beis. These Suders are fadd ni the gveat- 
esfc contenpt: ibty ase conaidefed in&awas and 
unclean, jFrom their occupation; and tbey arc 
Phoned because tfaey eat flash, tbe tbree other > 
eutes living enticely on v^tables. 

Of this verj caste, aa will appeu by tto foHow- 
iag comparison, our Gii»eyi are composed. 

We have seen that liie Oips^s are in the 
lughest d^rea filthy, and disgustbg; and with 
nrgard to character, of dw most depraved be«-t« : 
tint th^ Me thievish, liars, and-jraudulent to 
coicess : — and these are exactly the qoaKties of th« 
Sudeis. Baldsui s3ys, '* The Parcas are a filthy 
" race, in a word, a contemptible stinking psopk t 
** a wicked crew, who in winter steal much cattl^ 
*^ kill them, and sell the hides." It is agam re* 
lated m theDani^ Misuon Intelligence, '* Nobody« 
*' caa deny diat the Barker are Üie dr^ arid 
*' refiose of ajl the Indians; they have wic^ dStr*\ 
** positions, are ^evish, arrant liars, are intractaUe 
* with good usog^ require to be kept in order by 
«' ftar aad blow^ «ad held under «oatinual re* 

ü,.:,-z,,;i:,C00glc 



" strÜBt" Moreover, Neuhof assures u«, "The' 
" Parruas are full of every kind of dishonesty; 
" tliey do not consider lying and cheating to be 
** stnJtil, as they bave no other maxim or custom 
" among them." The Qipsey's solicitud& to con* 
ceal hi» language, is likewise a striking lodiaii 
tnit " Custom/ «ays Pallas^ of the ladi^ms . 
rauod Astrakan» " has. rendered them to the 
*' greatest degree suspicious about their language 
** insomuch that I never was able to obt^ a siqiaU 
. " vocabulary from ihem." 

Zn addition to the fpregojng, thf^ Gipsey« lo:^ 
to intoxicate themselves.: they are particularly^^food 
of brandy, because it more speedily aoswers their 
purpose than any other liquor. Among the Suders 
ve find this incHna^on is universal ; though other 
Indians do not commit such e^<:ei% ox very s^ldop^ 
and then privately. 

What ha« been further said with respect to (bf 
immoral life of the Gipseys, agrees, perfectly with 
the Suders. " Their wives and daughters," »ays ' 
Neuhof, " make no diflßculty of yielding up tJieir 
y persons, for money, to any sort of people, h^ 
" t^y of lyhat country or reli^on ao^yer ; as tb^ 
" inclination of this trilje tends morCi.to voluptu- 
** (uisnes^ tiiaa towa,rds diligence or industry," 

With re^d to Qipsey marriages, it has beea 
asserted, that it is a matter of iadiS^rence to theni| 
wb^^^ex thß puty be thp it«are&t relatjou of ^ 



.CcKM^Ic 



aoa 

utter stranger; or, as Salmon expresses htmself, . 
the nearest relations cohabit like beasts with each 
other; and as to education, that their children 
grow up' in the most shameful neglect, without 
either discipline or instruction. All this is pre- 
cisely the case with the Pariars. In the Journals 
of the Missionaries already quoted, it is "said, 
" With respect to matrimony, they act like the 
" beasts; and their children are brought up without 
'" restraint or information." 

Gipseys are fond of being about horses ; so are 
fhe Suders' in India, for which reason ■ they 
are commonly employed as horsekeepers by the, 
Europeans resident in that country. 

The Gipseys were formerly employed as flayer^ 
hangmen, andexecutiohefsj all over Hungary' and 
Transylvania;' and they stiilreadily perform those 
offices whenever called upon. In like manner, in 
India, no one who is' not of the' caste of Suders 
will on any account transact that kind of business." 

■We have seen that the Gipseys hunt after 
Cattle which have died of distempers, in order to 
feed on them; and where they 'can provide itiorc 
of the ilesh than is sufficient for one* day's c^n-- 
siimption, dry it in the sun : such is likewise' a, 
constant custom with the Pariars in India. "«Tt 
*' is their office," according to the accounts ' we 
have of them, " to remove cai^rfon; Which they cut 
('upj part they boil frpi^b'itad ea'i, -otliÄr parts 

L, ,. ;) .Cookie 



SOS 

" they dry in pieces, by the heat of the sun, for 
*' their future provision." 

Hitherto the accounts of the Gipseys aiidSuders 
perfectly coincide. E^'en the before-inentioned 
smiths and dancing girls are of this caste': and 
as they before shewed, in general, from the simi- 
larity of their make, that they were of Indirai 
extraction, so in this instance they give parti- 
cular evidence, that they are descendants from the 
lowest class. 

But there are still some further traits relating to 
the Gipseys; we shall now examine whether they 
also are to be found among the Suders. Of these 
'the first is, that the Gipseys always choose their 
place of residence near some village or city ; very 
■ seldom within the village or city, even though 
there may be no order to prevent it: as is the case 
in Moldavia, Wallachia, and all parts of Turkey. 
Even the more _, improved Gipseys, as those m 
Transylvania, who have long since discontinued 
their wantlering niode of life, and might, with per- 
mission frorti government, reside within the citie^ 
yet ratber choose to build their huts in some bye- 
place, without their hmits. This custom seenis 
to be a remnant of their original Suder education ; 
it being usual, ■ all over India, ftr the Suders to 
have their huta without the villages of the other 
castes, and in retired places near their cities. 

Further, with regard to the Gipseys' reli^onj 



fi04 
VC may ttecAWct, from what hu been mä, tbat 
tiieir sense of it is vety confiard, and that they 
bave not the least degree of steadinew in it To 
tiie Gipseys, every persuasion is the same; ai 
•ften as he meets with a different one, he changes 
Ins opinifms. To-day he receives the sacrament 
tt a lAtheran*; next Sunday, from a Roman* 
catholic ; and perhaps before the end of the week 
partakes of the communion in a Reformed church. 
Yet the greater part of them do not even go so &r 
as this, but live without any religion at all, and 
are, a* TolUu» says, worse than heathens, llic 
more wonderful such an appearance is — of a whole 
people being so void of and indifferent about re- 
ligiorf^ — the more weight it carries with it to con- 
firm' their Indian origin, wheA all this is found to 
be Uterally true of the Suders. " This race," says 
Bogerius, of the Suders in the kingdom of Sura^ 
** seems to be .neither heathens nor Mahometans ; -. 
** they live on in their own way, without aiqr 
" retigicHi, or worshipping of God. There are 
" some, it is true, 'who imitate the other castes 
*' in an outward shew of religion, and f^p(nnt 
'' priests for themselves ; but they neither frequent 
" the pagodas of the higher castes, dot have any 
*' of their own : and as, to the choice of their deities, 
*' every one conforms to the custom of the place 
** where he lives, or happens to remain a short 
*' tim^. exactly tiie same as the Gipseys," 

L, ,. ;) .Google 



If fcoplet 'm r^octiag on tbe emigntion of the 
G»pseys, an not determined to imagine that tbey 
were actuated by a blind impulse, to break up at 
enpe, and quit their native country ; no cause c«a 
be assigned for tbeir retreat from thence so plan-; 
ttble as the war of Timur Beg in India. The date 
of their arrival marks it veiy plainly. It was in 
, the years .1408 and 1409 that this conqueror ra- 
vaged India; and having persuaded himself as 
well as his followers, that he had undertaken tbe 
expedittoa a^nst India for the purpose of.dis- 
ieminating the Mahometan religion, his war was 
oppressive enough to occasion such an emigratwn. 
Not only eveiy one who made any resistance was 
destroyed, and such as fell into the enemy's haada^ 
tho<^ quite defenceless, were made slavey but 
in a short time these very slaves» to Uie number 
of a hundred thousand, were put to death. As 
in consequence an universal panic took fJaec^ 
nobody being seaire that it might not be his own 
&te in a short time, what could be more natural 
than that a great number of terrified inhabitants 
should endeavour to save themselves by 6ight^ 

. An ot^ecti«^ naturally occurs that when this 
supposed flight took plae^ had it been true, not 
Gipseys only, or the lowest class of people, but 
widi them all awts of Indians, of superior rank, 
VOQld have ctnue among us. But tins argument 
will läU of itself, when we reflect o« the pre*: 



:, Google 



2Ö6 
possession which the three higher caste» of Indians 
enttrtain for their country. They ascribe an cx- 
traoi^inary degree of holiness to i^ and believe it 
to be the only country thought, by the Creator 
of the iiniverse, worthy for such satictified people 
as the Bramins, Tschechteries, and Beis, to dwelt" 
in. They would rather suffer torture and death,- 
than quit this land, chosen by the Almighty hint-' 
sdf fof their residence, to go and'dwfell any-whei*' 
else.' 'Moreover a Suder is, in their estimation, 
the most execrable being in the world; and the 
least intercourse with him wotild bo defiling and 
degrading their high characters, which, to them, 
would be more .dreadful than death. ' Wherefore 
k was a moral impossibility for those of a higher 
caste to have any thing in common with a Suder, 
or that they should have made an united retreat. 
. Finally, by putting themselves into the power of 
the Suders, with whom they live constantly in a 
state of discord and inveteracy, they would have 
liazarded a greater danger, than by patiently risk- 
ing their fate from the hands of their common 
enemy. If any of the higher ranks of Indians- 
did withdraw themselves, on account of the trou- 
bles, it is probable they retired southwards, to 
people of their own sort, the Mahrattas. 
,. As every part to the northward and eastward 
.was beset- by the enemy, and no -passage left 
in those directions for escaping, it seems rooct pFQ> 

L,;,-z,;i:,C00^IC 



207 
battle that the .countries belov Multan, to tlie 
mouth of. the Indus, were, the : first wylum and 
rendezvous of the. fiigitive Sudere. - Hdfe they 
Vfere s^fe; and so remained, till Timur returned 
from his victories, oa the Ganges. Then it was 
that they firsf entirely- quitted . the country ; and, 
probably, .with' them a considerable number of 
the proper inhabitants about the Indus, which wi\l 
explain the meaning of their original name,' Ci- 
ganen, or, according to .the German mode of.spealo- 
ing, Zigeuner. For if it was in the country of 
the Zinganen that these terrified fugitives collected, 
and they afterwards drew a considerable number 
of the Zinganen themselves along with them, 
nothing could be more easy or natural than that 
the people who had assembled from the general 
wreck should take the name of the greater 
number. ■ , 

By . what route they came to us, cannot be 
ascertained : if they went straight through the^ 
southern Persian deserts of Sigistan, Makran, and 
Kirman, along the Persian Gulph to the mouth 
of the Euphrates, thence they ' might get, by 
Bassora, into the great deserts of Arabia, after- 
wards into Arabia Petraea, and so arrive in Egypt, 
by the isthmus of Suez. They must certainly 
have been in Egypt before they reached us ; 
otherwise we cannot account for the report that 
they were Egyptians. In what manner they 



:,.;,l,z.dbyC00gk' 



S08 
were afterwards transported to Europe is also an 
obscure research : perhaps it was effected by mems 
of the Turks, vbo, being at that time fuUy em- 
ployed with the Grecian empire, might permit the 
Gipseys to travel about with the rabble of Serden- 
jesti and Nephers, wbo were a^miated to go oa 
X8va|^ng parties. However, all that can be said 
«pon that subject is mere surmise. « The chief aim 
in this Dissertation was, to prove that the Gipseys 
came from Hindostan, and that they were Süden, 
which it is hoped has been accomplished. Whoi 
every thing, even the most fortuitous concomitant 
örcumstances, but particulariy th^ nioat ded^ 
wve one — the similarity of their language to that 
of Hindostan, uniformly point out tiiat extrac- 
tioui we cannot believe them to belong to a dif- 
jferent country, and to be descmded from another 
peope. 



i:,C00glc 



SUPPLEMENT. 



To invalidate, if possible, the charge of cannibalism— 
apparently so well fonnded — broaght against the Gip- 
sey tribe, it is thoaght proper in this puce to mention 
circnnutances, relative to the proceedings in Hungary, 
vttich at least render the justice of the sentence pro- 
nouDoed against these devoted people doubtful. 

Id the year 1534, as recordeain the Hungarian histoiy, 
the Gipseys were suspected of traitorously assisting JooA 
Zapolya ; in consequence of which the governor of LeuU- 
chau, Tsemabo, sent some horsemen to arrest a company 
of them, near Iglo : the greatest part escaped by flight ; 
only a few old men and boys were taken, who were 
broueht into Iicutschan. These confessed circumstantially 
{which certainly appears improbable, that men should iyö 
to effect their own ruin), as well b^ore, as upon the 
rack, the follovins falsities— That a hundred of them 
had been sent by Zapolya since the middle of Lent, and 
had agreed for a sum of money to set fire to the five 
chief cities, Kaschau, Leutschau, Bartfeld, EpeneOf 
and Zeben : that the preceding Saturday several of them 
had privately entered Leutscfiau, disguised like Walla» 
chiana and shepherds, under the pretence of selling skins i 
that they laid fire in various places ; and moreover, that 
they had mardered several people : and finally, that they 
had letters firom Zapolya to thirteen different cities, wim' 
orders to afford them shelter and protection within their 
districts, as long as they chose to remain. In Conse- 
quence of this confession they were impaled, " but 
*' whether justly or not," adds the Chronicle, " that, ler 
" him answer for who condemned them : " for on being 
conducted about the town, to shew in what places they 
had laid the fire, th^ conid not specify them ; besides, 
they denied every thing when they came to execution. 

Except the circumstance of retracting, of which bo- 
thing is mentioned in the sentence of deiuh, the above 
case seems to be exactly similar to that of the men-eaters 
executed in Hungury in 1782. These were taken upon 
snspicion of thett; in the course of their examination 
something ^scaped them which gave occasion to think 



,Coo;-^lc 



the; had committed murderj and the criminals häng in* 
terrogated on this poiot, perhaps on account of the se- 
verity used, or probably from an idea of heroism (a very 
common- trait ia their character), they coafeased the ■ 
fact, and chattered away till they had tilled the paper, 
Without considering consequences. When desired to 
state where they had deposited the bodies, they promised 
to shew, but on being brought to the spot nothing was 
Found, and they endeavoured to run off. Nevertheless, 
faaviag once confessed, they were put on the rack. As 
the persons said to have been murdered could not b^ 
found, the judge imagined they must have eaten them, 
which, though denied by the poor miserable wretches, 
decided their fate. 

• (A) 

How iBBdi Ibe Oiptej lingnage has altered by time, may. be ten, in K 
«rikinc ■B•BDe^ from ibe AUowiDg irantlsttuoi ol' the Lord'i Ptaytc, abuiutd 
fiom Hungarian GipKjt at diäenul peiioda. 

1. Lsrd'i Prayer, Bccordiog to Ibe old tiuiiltlioD. 

Dadef guU dch dicha men^, Ciwneiig hagodaleden tiTel, ogolede* 
bogoladh^iti, te n felpesz. bogolo anito Czarchode, ta Tela meap sitrekedspa, 
Buro mandro kata ngjese igtettuzara ■ oure beuccha, mole dume, andro vo 
Ijnfa, eiikala meguU, dela eucbeJa omatB. Seiikesz kiubia doiIwib Iniiiszai, 
putjierc feiiuamacme, I kaoa andre lecsi, ale Va koaz. Piba. 

A 3. The same, according to a mote modem traiulBtion. 

Mufo Dad, koliro andro thetos« ; Ta weltto sienlaoao ; Ta weltro tTiim ; 
Ta weljii oljia. szarthin andro tberoiz kethjn fheprep'hu: sie feogytst damande 
maadro ag^ean a min^ ; ErtiUa amare beietba, siar, ('bamio le crtbiduuna 
nbezectaa ; Mali laa men andre bezna, nicka men le diongalin namilr, Kc 
liima Chin, lira hino baribs »ekovari. Amen. 

3. Anotbei, with ihe Latin. 



to Bvel tri lume te khergyol tri Toje szär andra c^rljs^ thuU 
at veniat taum regnum ut fiat tua volnatas sicnt in cmlo licqüe 
le ph£ pha. fcm6ro maniiro ogy^tiainna d£ l>m$ng£ i^ii friM 
Bt Ü tetis. nostrum pauein quotldiauuii^da , nobii hodie, rcmitts 
WBCrige gmlro vilsigow te inika kidä irtinfcha 6iiifirfng6, palidstM 
,i^bis noatrum peccatum ut mu ita reuuttimna Doitris, oe.inducaa 
£m£ii &ndra djicbnnj^ah) tsaazosz, t&uü uak&T amen äiri ändial , ij 
nai in periculuiam boram, aed suioe bos ex e 
declmn^alo tiri hin i -lame lir! hin ezor to akana-siekcvai. 
peiiculo luna est ' leguam tna e>t poteotia, ut nnnc-semper. 



BAtLlltTISE, TtP. Vvhftt. Ad^U. 



i:,C00gIC 



