r 


c^ 


^ 


,C5 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA 
AT  LOS  ANGELES 


k. 


7;  ':^  '.5 


y"     7  ^    1  /  ^^  ^'*'^ 


^2.^2^ 


c/^c,  :    />     ^/^ 


DISSERTATION 


ON      THE 


GIPSIES. 


DISSERTAT  ION 

ON    THE 

GIPSIES, 


E  E  I  N  a 


AN     HISTORICAL     E  N  QJU  I  R  Y, 

CONCERNING 

The  Manner  of  Life,    CEconomy,.  Cuftoms    and   Conditions   of 
thefe  People   in  Europe,    and   their  Origin. 

WRITTEN     IN    GERMAN, 

B      Y 

HEINRICH  MORITZ   GOTTLIEB   GRELLMANN. 

TRANSLATED    INTO    ENGLISH, 

B    Y 

MATTHEW    RAPER,    Elq.    F.  R.  S.  &  A.  S. 


LONDON: 

Printed    for    the    EDITOR,    by    G.    Bfgg, 

And  to  be  had  of  P.  ELMSLEY,  and  T.  CADELL,  in  the  Strand, 

and  J.  SEWELL,  in  Cornhill.     1787. 


V 


'9 
"5 


1  I  5- 


^       - 

o 

ro  TO 


QS6^£ 


Sir      J  O  S  E  P  H     BANK  S,     Bart.     P.  R.  S. 


S    I    R, 


S    I    have   not   the    \-anit_\    to   tiiiiik   it   is  in  my  power 
to  add  any  hiftre  'to  a    charafter  at   the   fame   time  fo  well 
known  and   juftly  admired,   my  only   reafon  for  requefting 
i^  your  permifiion  to  addrefs  this  tranflation  to  you,   was,  that 

I  might  haV'C  an  opportunity,  pubUcly  to  declare,  how 
much  I  eftecm  myfelf  obliged  to  you,  and  that  I  {hall 
ever  retain  the  rnofl  grateful  remembraiTce  of  your  unremitted 
friehdlhip.  I  ha\e  the  honor  to  be,  with  the  greatcft 
-relpeifl:, 

SIR,  • 

r 

Your  much    obliged, 
Humble  Servant, 


PREFACE. 

.,/jlS  my  chief  aim  in  tranflating  the  jollowifig  Sheets,  ivas 
to  give  fuch  of  my  Countrymeti,  who  are  unacquainted  with  the 
German  language,  an  opportunity  of  learning  from  what  part  of 
the  I'Forld,  it  is  probable  the  Gipfies  came  among  us;  I  have  been 
follicitous  to  render  the  exaSl  meaning  of  the  Author,  without 
endeavoring  to  compofe  an  elegant  'Treatife,  which  would,  in 
manv  inflames,  have  obliged  me  to  deviate  too  far  from  the 
Original. 

The  Book  having  been  printed  off,  before  I  knew  it  was 
intended  to  publifh  a  Second  Edition,  it  was  impojjible  for  me 
to  incorporate  the  Additions  into  the  body  of  the  JFork ;  therefore 
to  avoid  fwelling  it  too  ?nuch,  the  Reader  will  find  only  an 
AbjlraEl  of  the  mofl  material  Vajfages,  in  detached  Paragraphs., 
and  a  compleat  JJfl  of  the  yluthors  quoted  by  the  German 
IFriter. 

Part 


PRE      F      A      C      E. 

Part  of  the  Second  Edition  only  tendings  to  Jlx'w.  the  great  fuper- 
fiition  of  fame  of  the  Germans,  or  to  corroborate  proofs,  already 
u-ell  authenticated  in  the  Firfl,  I  have  onl^  inferted  fuch  Places, 
as  relate  entirely  to  the  Gipjies,  and  of  thofe  merely  what  have 
not  been  treated  of  in  the  former  Edition. 


C    i    ) 


PREFACE. 


Al 


LT HOUGH  much  has  been  fa'id  and  writtm  concerning  the 
Gipfics,  nevertheh'fs,  except  the  article,  in  th'e  Fienna  Gazettes, 
about  the  Gipfies  in  Hungarv,  nobody  has  ever  thought  of  publijhing 
a.  circunijlantial,  connected  account  of  the  ceconomy  of  thefc  pcopkj 
their  opinions  and  coiuiilion,  fmce  they  have  been  in  Rurope^ 
Whatever  has  appeared^  on  this  fubjeB,  has  been  in  detached  pieces, 
eccafionally  communicated  by  zvriters  of  travels,  or  by  fuch  perfons, 
who,  having  made  particular  enquires  about  the  origin  of  the  Gipfcs, 
formed  a  fyflem  of  their  ozvn,  concerning  them ;  or  laftly  fuch  hints 
as  zfere  buried  in  old  records,  or  difperfed  in   various  other   books. 

I  cannot,  therefore,  think.,  any  apology  requijite,  fur  my  having 
carefully  eolk£fed  ihefe  fugitive  pieces,  diligently  examined  and  fleuled 
them,  in  order  to  try,  zvhether  it  may  not  be  poffible,  to  compile 
fame  confijlent  hijlory  of  this  tribe,  which  has  diffufed  itfelf  through 
all  the  countries  of  Europe :  ■  efpccially  as  fuch  a  defription,  by 
reafon  of  the  flrange  and  Jlriking  cufloms  of  the  Gipfies,  may  be 
(qually  iifeful  for  entertainment,  as  for  the  promotion  of  thc\  knozvledge 
of  manners  and  mankind. 

a  I  Jhould.^ 


(      ii     ) 

J  Jlmdd  noizvUhJlanding,  have  been  laider  the  nceejin  of  leavbsr 
p-cat  cbcifriis,  ill  many  places,  had  I  not  been  aJT'fted  with  kind 
comnuinieatioHS  from  obliging  friends,  in  various  parts :  to  whom  I 
take  this  opportunity  of  returning  my  fmcere  thanks. 

Many  of  thefe  infonnations  arrived  very  late,  which  pre- 
vented my  book  from  coming  out,  according  to  promife ;  as  I 
was  unzvilUng  to  publijlj  before  the  receipt  of  them.  I  mufl,  for 
the  fame  reafon  introduce  here,  what  I  could  not  infert  in  the  fifth 
page,  that  there  are  in  Poland  and  Lithuania,  as  zvell  as  in  Courland, 
lan  amazing  number  of  Gipfies.  Their  IVaywods  in  Courland  difiinguif/jcs 
himfelf  from  his  equals,  in  other  countries,  being  not  only  very  much 
refpCLled  by  his  ozvn  people,  but,  even  by  the  Courland  nobility,  is 
efleemed  a  'man  of  high  rank,  and  is  frequently  to  be  met  with  at 
entertainments  and  card  parties  in  the  firft  families,  where  he  is  always 
/I  welcome  guefi.  I'he  name  of  the  prcfent  one  is  George,  cr 
(according  to  the  Courland  pronunciation)  Gurgc.  His  drefs  is 
uncommonly  rich,  in  comparifon  of  others  of  his  kind,  generally  filk 
in  fummer,  and  conflantly  velvet  in  "winter.  'The  common  Gipfies, 
on  the  contrary,  are  exa£lly  like  their  brethern  in  other  countries,  in 
every  particular :  even  zcith  regard  to  religion,  they  fi.^ezo  the  fame 
levity  and  indifference;  they  fuffer  their  children  to  be  fcvcral  times 
baptifd,  they  nozv  profefs  thcmfilves  to  be  Ca'holics,  then  Lutherans^ 
end  prefmly  after  nothing   at  al'» 

There 


(     Hi     ) 

'There  might  perhaps  be  jvft  cauje  to  accufe  me  of  prclixifv,  in 
waking  my  feconJ.  fc'dlon  Ukezvifi  a  coUcSiion  of  opinions,  conarnitig 
the  origin  of  the  G/pfes,  and  detaining  the  reader  zvith  all  forts  of 
difputeSy  before  he  comes  to  my  ozvn  fentiments  and  exanii':ation, 
zvere  it  not  a  fi/jfcient  jujlif cation,  that  I  am  bound  not  only  ta 
believe  every  one,  but  alfo  to  produce  him  to  public  I'iezv,  in  order 
to  afcertain  hozv  mu-th  has  already  been  difcovered  concerning  the 
origin  of  this  tribe  ;  as  it  is  from  thence,  that  people  mujl  form  a 
judgement  whether  I  have  cleared  up  any  doubtful  point,  or  zvhetherj 
1  have   rendered,    zvhat  before  zvas  dark,  jVill  more  intricate. 

If  I  have  fucceeded,  in  my  endeavour,  to  trace  the  Gipjies  front 
India,  it  zvould  be  bafe  ingratitude  in  me,  to  conceal  the  great  man, 
(Councellor  Biittner)  to  zvhoni  I  am  indebted  for  one  of  my  flrongefi 
proofs,  viz.  the  comparifon  of  the  languages.  To  him  belongs  the 
zvhole  catalogue,  confijling,  as  far  as  relates  to  the  Gipfey  idiom, 
i.'ot  only  of  the  Zi'ords  collccied  and  printed,  dozvn  from  Buonaventura 
VulcaniHS  to  Mr.  Rudigcr ;  but  alp,  in  great  meafure,  and 
particularly  thofe  refpeSling  the  grammar  of  a  zvrittin  colleSlion, 
which  Mr.  Bauer,  Hanoverian  Secretary,  took  the  opportunity  in  a 
journey  to  Hungary,  of  learning  from  the  Gipfies  reftdcnt  in  his 
ozvn  country.     For  this  civility,   though  intended  to  Councellor  Biittner, 

a  2  he 


(     i-v     ) 

^ye  I'iis  at  the  fame  time  a  well  founded  cla'ini  to  my  thanks,  which 
•I  take  this  public  opportumty  to  return  him. 

The  reafon  zvhy  this  treatife  is  comprifed  in  a  fmallcr  compafs, 
than  was  announced  by  the  advertifement,  is,  that  I,  at  firfr, 
intended  to  compare  viore  languages,  viz.  every  one,  that  various 
■authors  had,  at  different  times,  given  out  as  the  Gipfey  tongue. 
This  affair,  lonfidering  the  affiftance  I  had  to  depend  upon,  would 
rot  have  been  very  difficult ;  but  when  I  confidered,  hoiv  well  this 
trouble  ?night  he  fparcd,  I  confined  niyfclf  to  the  Hindofian  alone, 
not  doubting,  I  ff:>all  be  readilv  forgiven,  for  not,  unneceffarily,  taking 
up  the  reader's  time  in  dry  difquijitiom. 


Gottifigen, 
^th   September,    1783. 


TABLE 


TABLE      of      C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S, 

I  NTRO  D  U  C-riO  N.  > 

FIRST        SECTION. 

D.ESCRiPilox  of  ibe  GiPsiKs,    tbeir  manner  of  life,    their  CKJlomi 

and  properties^ 

CHAP  T  E  R      I. 

Farii}us  appellations  of  thefe  people.  .  •  P^^s"    I 

C  H  A  P  T  E  R     ir. 

On  the  dlfperfton  of  the   Gipftes    and  their  numbers  in  Ettrope.      a 

CHAPTER      III. 
TJ:e  properties  of  their  bodies.  .  .  I  "7 

C  H  A  P  T  E  R     IV. 


On  their  food  and  beverage.  •  • 


R  ■ 


II 


CHAPTER     V. 

On  the  drefs  of  the  GipJteS.  .  .  •  I         1 7 

CHAPTER    VI, 


(     vl     ) 

C  H  A  P  T  E  R      VI. 

On   tl'eir  fdmily  Kconomy,  .  .  •  «  2  a 

CHAPTER     VII. 

7'helr  occupations  and  trades.  .  .  .  .27 

CHAPTER      VIII. 

Oil  their  marriages  and  education.  ...  45 

CHAPTER      IX. 

On  their  ficknefs,   death   and  burial.  .  .  .50 

CHAPTER      X. 

political  regulations  peculiar  to  the  Gipjies.  ,  •  53 

CHAPTER      XI. 

On  the   religion  of  the  Gipjies.  .  .  .  5S 

CHAPTER.      XII. 

'Tkelr  language^,  fciences  and  arts.  .  •  •  61 

CHAPTER  XIIL 


(    vli     ) 

CHAPTER       XIII. 

Cbara5ler  and  capacities  of  the  Gipjies ;     zvhether  they  are  an 

advantage  or   detrimeiii  to  a  Jlate.  ,  .  65 

CHAPTER       XIV. 
Concerning  their  being  tolerated  by  a  Jlate.  .  •      ■     75 

CHAPTER       XV. 
EJfay  on  their  improvement.         .   -  .  ,      ■       .      ■       8z 

^  Letter  from   a  noble  Hungarian  Lady,  on  the  fubjeul  of  the 

Gipfies  in  Hungary.  .  .  .  -  89 

SECOND        SECTION. 

On     the     Origin     of     the     Gipsies. 

CHAPTER      I. 

The  f.rjl  appearance  of  GipJies  in  Europe.  *  f  93 

CHAPTER       II. 

On  the  fincli/y,  pafsports,    and  difference  of  the  former  from 

the  latter  Gipfus.  .  .  .  .  99 

CHAPTER    III. 


(     vi"     ) 

CHAPTER      m, 

Trefunm  Origin   of  the  Gipfies.  .  ,  ,  loj 

CHAPTER      IV. 

On  the   Egyptian  dcfcent  of  the  Gipfies.  .  .  I14 

CHAPTER       V. 

The  Gipfies  come  from  Hindojlaii.  ,  ,  •  131 

CHAPTER       VI. 

The  Gipftes  aye  of  the  Cajl,  called  SvJcr 5.  .  .  1 68 


A    N 


HISTORICAL       ESSAY, 


ON       THE 


GIPSIES. 


INTRODUCTION. 

Jl   H  E  Gipfies  are  a  fmgular  phenomenon  in  Europe  ,•  whether^ 
we  contemplate  their  habitations,  attend  at  their  meals,  or  even 
only  look  in  their  faces,  they  always  appear  particular,  and  we 
ace  each  moment  ftruck  with  fomething  new  and  extraordinary. 

What  appears  moft  worthy  of  remark  is,  that  neither  time,  . 
climate,  nor  example,  have,  in  general,  hitherto,  made  any 
alteration.  For  the  fpace  of  between  three  and  four  hundred 
years,  they  have  gone  wandering  about,  like  pilgrims  and  ftran- 
gers:  they  are  found  in  eaftern  and  weftern  countries,  as  well 
among  the  rude  as  civilifed,  indolent  and  adtive  people;  yet  they 
remain  ever,  and  every  where,  what  their  fathers  were  —  Gipfies. 
Africa  makes  them  no  blacker,  nor  Europe  whiter;  they  neither 
learn  to  be  lazy  in  Spain;  nor  diligent  in  Germany:  in  Turkey 

b  Mahomet, 


(     X     ) 

Mahomet,  and  among  Chriftians  Chrift,  remain  equally  without 
adoration.  Around,  on  every  fide  they  fee  fixed  dwellings,  with 
fettled  inhabitants,  they  neverthelefs,  go  on  in  their  own  way, 
and  continue,  for  the  moft  part,  unfettled  wandering  robbers. 

When  we  fearch  for  fimilar  cafes,  among  all  the  people  who 
have  quitted  their  mother  country,  and  inhabited  a  foreign  one, 
we  do  not  meet  with  a  fingle  inftance  that  exadtly  agrees  with 
them.  Hiftory  certainly  does  record  people,  that  have  migrated, 
and  remained  the  fame  in  a  ftrange  country ;  but  then  this  con- 
ftancy  has  been  either,  on  account  of  religion,  permitted  by  the 
regents,  or  maintained  by  their  viftorious  arms:  but  this  laft 
circumftance  has  exifted  much  lefs  frequently  than  one  would 
imagine.  Where  a  conquered  people  were  more  enlightened 
than  their  conquerors,  it  has  often  happened,  that  the  latter  have 
adopted  their  manners.  The  Romans  became  Greeks  on  the 
conqueft  of  Greece;  and  the  Franks  became  Gauls  in  that  coun- 
try: The  Mantcheous  vanquifhed  the  Chinefe,  but  Chinefe 
cuftoms  prevailed  over  thofe  of  the  Mantcheous.  How  comes 
it  then,  that  the  GIpfies,  ^who  never  eftablifhed  their  manners 
and  cuftoms  by  force,  nor,  being  bigotted  to  them  by  religion, 
obtained  any  toleration  from  government,  remain  unchanged,  and 
refemble  each  other  exadly,  in  every  place  ?  There  are  two 
caufes,  to  which  this  is  principally  owinp;  one  is  the  place  from 
whence  they^ originate,  with  their  coiifequent  way  of  thinking; 
the  other  is  the  circumftances  which  have  hitherto  attended  tijeir 
fituation. 


The 


(     xi     ) 

The  Gipfies  are  an  eaftcni  people,  and  have  eaftern  notions. 
It  is  inherent  in  uncivllifed  people,  particularly  thofe  of  Oriental 
countries,  to  be  ftrongly  attached  to  their  own  habits:  every 
cuftom,  every  conception,  which  has  once  been  current  among 
them,  be  it  ever  fo  (i)  pernicious  or  ridiculous,  (?.)  is  invariably 
preferved;  or  any  affeftion  which  has  once  predominated  in  their 
minds,  retains  its  dominion  even  for  ages.  Innovations  do  not 
eafily  fucceed  with  them.  The  leaft  deviation  from  cuftom  is 
obferved,  and  often  refented  with  impetuofity.  It  is  neceflary, 
in  order  for  any  new  thing  to  take  root,  that  it  be  either  introdu- 
ced by  cunning  and  force,  or  be  attended  with  the  moft  favorable 
circumftances.  This  latter  was  the  cafe  with  Chriftianity.  Pro- 
vidence had  called  Greeks  and  Romans  into  the  eaft,  and,  by 
innumerable  viciffitudes,  had  rendered  that  country  ripe  for 
further  inftrudlion:  then  came  the  great  fower,  Chrift,  fcattered 
the  feed,  and  it  profpered.  Mahomet,  on  the  contrary,  before 
he  became  ftrong  enough  to  convince  with  the  fword,  brought 
about  his  purpofe  by  art.  He  knew  that  the  weak  fide  of  his 
countrymen,  was  their  veneration  for  every  thing  handed  down 
from  their  forefathers,  fo  gave  his  new  religion  the  coloring  of 
antiquity. 

He  fays,  "  We  have  fwerved  from  the  religion  of  our  founder 
"  Abraham,  and  have  introduced  novelties  among  us :  Abraham 
"  worfliipped  only  one  God,  we'  have  many  Gods.  1  am  fent  to 
"  retrench  thefe  novelties,  and  to  bring  you  back  to  the  religion 
"  of  your  forefathers."  This  was  the  firft  ground  Mahomet 
went  upon,    when  the    Iftimaelite    would    not    acquiefce  in  the 

b  z.  having 


(     xii     ) 

having  fallen  oft'  from  Abraham's  religion,  he  proceeded.  "  Yc 
"  are  illiterate  people,  ye  have  no  books,  the  inhabitants  of  the 
"  neighbouring  countries  have  books,  which  cototain  the  religion 
"  of  Abraham."  The  Arabians  applied  to  the  Jews  and  Chriflians, 

■for  information,  on  this  head;  as  the  event  turned  in  favour  6l 
Mahomet,  they  yielded  without  contradidlion.  The  new  prophet 
proceeded,  in  teaching,  and  again  appealed  to  the  people  with 
books :  the  Arabians  too  continued  afking  queftions,  being  more 
tradable  whenever  his  alTertions  were  confirmed :  when  the  con- 
trary happened,  a  difpute  arofe,  in  which  the  prophet  could  only 
get  the  better,  by  defending  the  antiquity  of  his  madnefs  at  the 

•expence  of  truth;    accufing  both  the  Jews  and    Chriftians  with 

'having  falfified  their  books.  (3) 

What  helped  Mahomet  with  the  Arabians,  has  been,  in  latter 
times,  very  ferviceable  to  the  Jefuits,  in  China.  How  would 
thefe  cunning  fathers  have  got  admiffion  for  their  religion,  among 
the  Chinefe,  unlefs  they  had  referred  to  Confucius,  (4)  in  aid 
of  their  dodtrines  ?  Thefe  are  only  inftances  of  changes  in  reli- 
gion, it  is  the  fame  in  other  things.  In  the  eaftern  nations  no 
improvement  is  adopted,  be  it  of  what  kind  it  will,  merely 
becaufe  it  is  an  improvement.  The  Chinefe  are  acquainted  with 
•the  ufe  of  glafs,  yet  their  mirrors  are  always  made  of  metal,  and 
their  windows  of  oyfter  fhells.  (5)  Mechanical  watches  have 
been,  for  ages,  ufed  at  the  court  of  Pekin,  but  the  bulk  of  the 
Jiation  depend  upon  fire  and  (6)  water. 


From 


(     xlii     ) 

'From  the  above  it  is  evident,  that  the  Gipfies,  on  account  of 
their  eaftern  origin,  and  confequent  way  of  thinking,  are  not 
eafily  made  to  change  from  what  they  once  are.  When  we  further 
x:onlider  the  circumftances,  under  which  thefe  people  have  hither- 
to exifted,  we  want  nothing  more,  to  make  us  comprehend,  why 
they  have  remained,  to  the  prefent  time,  what  they  were  at  their 
iirft  arrival  in  Europe. 

Figure  to  yourfelf  a  perfon,  in  whom  cuftom,  and  deep  rooted 
affeclions,  are  the  only,  and  at  the  feme  time,  llrong  impulfes  to 
adtion;  in  whofe  foul,  no  new  unwonted  thoughts  arife,  in  con- 
fequence  of  his  own  refledions,    nor  find  eafy  admittance  when 
propofed  by  others :    leave  this  man  entirely   to  himfelf,  do  not 
permit  any  of  thofe  means  to  be  ufed,  which  are  requilite  to  give 
a  new  turn  to  his   ideas,  and   deep  rooted   prejudices;    he  muft 
neceffarily  remain  the  fame,  and  his  lateft  pofterity  will  continue 
like   him:    this  is  exadlly  the    cafe  with  the    Gipfies.     Unufed 
to    refleft,    fettered    by  habits,    they  arrived   in   our  quarter   of 
the  globe.     No  flate  has,  hitherto,  done  any  thing  for  the  exprefs 
purpofe  of  inftrufting  or  reforming  them;  except  the  Emprefs 
Therefa,  by  her  regulations,  which  were  never  put  in  execution. 
On  their  firft  arrival,  they  procured  paflports,  and  free  quarters, 
by  their  holy  lies.     They  difperfed,   begged,  deceived  the  com- 
mon people,  by  fortune  telling ;  they  ftole,  and  for  a  iong  time 
nobody  paid  any  attention  to  them.     At  lafl  the  evil  grew  too 
enormous,    the  complaints   againft  them  became  fo  loud,    that 
government  was  conflrained  to  take  official  notice  of  them;  they 
began  punidiing;    hanging  and  beheading  were  not  found  fuffi- 

ciently 


(     xiv     ) 

ciently  efEcacions,  yet  It  was  neceffary  to  go  to  the  root 
of  [the  grievance ;  it  was  judged  expedient  to  banifli  them ; 
a  method  more  likely  to  render  them  worfe  than  better,  and  even 
in  other  refpefts  is  liable  to  many  objedions,  although  the  cuftom 
has  prevailed,  down  to  thelateft  times.  The  neighbour,  to  whom 
thefe  unpoli{hed  guefts  were  fent,  fooner  or  later,  followed  the 
fame  method,  till,  in  the  end,  they  were  perfecuted  by  almoft  all 
kingdoms  and  ftates.  Although,  many  ftates  afterwards,  relaxing 
of  their  feverity,  the  Gipfies  crept  in,  a  few  at  a  time,  and  were 
fuffered  to  remain  quiet :  yet  every  one  of  them  flood  in  fear, 
innocent  or  guilty,  left  he  might  be  taken  unawares,  merely 
becaufe  he  was  a  Gipfey,  and  delivered  over  to  the  executioner. 
They  had  been  accuftomed  in  their  own  country,  to  live  remote 
from  cities  and  towns ;  now  they  became  ftill  more  inhabitants  of 
the  forefts  and  outcafts,  as.  In  confequence  of  the  fearch,  which 
was  made  after  them,  or  at  leaft  threatened  to  be  made,  they 
judged  themfelves  to  be  more  fecure,  in  defarts  and  concealment, 
than  they  would  have  been  in  frequenting  the  places  of  abode, 
and  having  free  interdourfe  with  the  civil  ifed  inhabitants :  whereby 
they  were  deprived  of  the  moft  probable  means  of  making  them 
change  their  manners.  And  yet  had  they  not  fequeftered  them- 
felves fo  much  from  other  people,  or  had  they  been  more  inclined 
to  mix  in  fociety,  it  is  not  probable,  without  fome  direft  interfe- 
rence of  the  ftate,  that  they  would  have  been  the  better  for  it. 
They  had  two  great  o.bftacles  to  conquer.  Firft,  by  mere  inter- 
courfe,  it  would  have  been,  generally  fpeaking,  a  difficult  matter, 
to  eradicate  the  prejudices  and  cuftoms  from  their  Oriental  minds. 
Secondly,  being  Gipfies,  people  would  not  eafily  have  eftablifhed 

anv 


(       XV       ) 

a"ny  conelpondence  with  them.  Let  us  reflect  how  different  they 
are  from  Europeans ;  the  one  is  white,  the  other  black.  This 
cloaths  himfelf,  the  other  goes  half  naked.  This  fliudders  at 
the  thought  of  eating  carrion,  the  other  prepares  it  as  a  dainty. 
Moreover  thefe  people  are  famed,  and  were  even  from  their  firft 
appearance  in  Europe,  for  being  plunderers,  thieves  and  incen- 
diaries :  fo  that  the  European  not  only  diflikes,  but  hates  them. 
For  the  above  reafons,  Europeans  have  always  driven  the  Gipfies 
away  from  them,  (7)  and  it  is  only  a  few  fimple  people,  who 
have  made  a  nearer  acquaintance,  in  order  to  confult  them  in 
matters  of  fuperftition. 

This  is  the  ftate  of  what  has  been  done  and  attempted,  for 
their  improvement ;  whereas,  as  foon  as  it  was  difcovered,  that 
the  Gipfies  were  ftrangers,  who  thought  of  nothing  lefs,  than 
returning  into  their  own  country,  if  any  plan  had  been  formed 
to  make  them  apply  to  fomething,  and  only  half  the  wife 
regulations,  left  behind  by  the  Emprefs  Therefa  in  her  ftates, 
for  the  management  of  thefe  people,  been  adopted,  and  duly 
enforced,  they  would  long  ago  have  been  diverted  of  the  rude 
nature  of  their  anceftors,  and  have  ceafed  to  be  the  uncultivated 
branches  of  a  wild  ftock.  On  the  contrary,  having  always  been 
left  to  themfelves,  it  could  not  be  o^iherwife,  but  that  they  muft 
remain  for  ever,    and  in  all  places,   the  lame. 

Perhaps  it  may  be  refcrved  for  our  age,  in  which  fo  much 
is  attempted  for  the  benefit  of  ftates  and  mankind,  to  humanife 

a  people. 


(     xvi     ) 

a  people,  who,  for  centuries,  have  wandered  in  error  and  neglecTc 
At  leaft  the  great    Jofeph    has  now  undertaken    (8)   it,    whofe 
orders  are  not  ufed  to  be  buried  in  flumber  and  oblivion,  without 
effefting  the  purpofe  for  which  they  were  intended.     It  cannot 
be  denied,  that,  confidering  the  multitude  of  them,  their  reform 
is  a  very  ferious  event  to   many   ftates.     Suppofe,  according  to 
a  rough  eftimate,    that  the  Gipfies  in  Hungary  and  Tranfilvania, 
including  the   Banat,    may  amount  to   upwards  of  one  hundred 
thoufand ;  what  a  difference  would  it  not  make,  in  thofe  countries,  if 
one  hundred  thoufand  inhabitants,  moftly  loungers,  beggars,  cheats, 
and  thieves,   who  now  reap  where  they  have  not  fown,  confuming- 
the   fiTjits    of  others    labor,    were    to   become    induftrious   ufeful 
fubjefts.     Their  reformation  is  a  difficult  taflc,    as  the  attempts, 
made    by  the   Emprefs  Therefa,    evince ;     a  boy,    (for  you  muft 
begin  with  them   from   children,    and   not   meddle  with  the  old 
ftrock,    on  whom  no  efforts  will  .take  effedl:  )    would   frequently 
appear  in  the  moft  promifing  train  to  civilifation ;     on  a  fudden 
;  his  wild  nature  would  break  out,    he  relapfed.  and  became  a  perfeft 
Gipfey  again.      But    the    matter    is  not,     therefore,   impoffible : 
was  it  not  even  fo  with  the  Saxons,   whom  Charles  the  Great  • 
converted   to  Chriftianity  ?     Let  the   ftate  only  perfevere  in   its  ■ 
endeavors,   fomething  will  be   gained  on  the  fecond  generation, 
and  with  the  third    or  fourth,    the    end    will    certainly    be  a£~ 
complifhed. 

On  confidering  the    properties,    and    manners  of  the  Gipfies,   • 
we  may  perceive,  that  thefe  people  are  endued  with  very  good  : 

capacities. 


(     xvii     ) 

capacities,  which  promife  to  make  a  profitable  return,  for 
much  trouble  beftowed  upon  them.  In  the  firft  Section  I  pro- 
duce only  one  attempt,  made  on  this  fpeculatlon,  and  Ihall  be 
happy  to  find  it  fufficiently  compleat,  to  give  the  leading 
features  of  their  charadler. 

The  origin  of  the  Gipfies  has  remained  a  perfe(5t  philofopher's 
ftone  till  now.  For  thefe  two  hundred  years  paft,  people  have 
been  anxious,  to  difcover,  who  thefe  guefts  are,  who  under  the 
name  of  Gipfies,  came  unknown  and  uninvited  into  Europe, 
in  the  fifteenth  century,  and  have  chofen  to  remain  here  ever 
fince.  No  older  enquirer  ever  produced  what  met  with  his 
fucceflbr's  approbation ;  a  fourth  fcarce  heard  what  a  third  had 
faid,  before  he  pafled  fentcnce  and  broached  a  new  opinion. 
There  is  no  caufe  for  wonder  at  the  mifcarriage  of  thefe  en- 
quiries, which  were  neither  more  nor  lefs,  than  a  collection  of 
conjeftures,  founded  on  imagination  and  partial  fpeculation. 
An  author  fet  to  work,  to  difcover  a  country,  or  people  to  whom  ' 
the  Gipfies  could  belong,  he  found  out  a  place  which  had  been 
named,  for  inflance,  Zeugitana,  or  a  people  who  bore  fome  fainf 
refemblance  to  the  Gipfies.  As  one  coal  lights  another,  thefe 
two  fimilarities  became  perfeftly  applicable  to  the  Gipfies,  he 
flopped  here  and  publiflied  his  difcovery. 

Several  inveftigators  laid  their  foundation  on  hearfay,  and  un- 
authenticated  evidence;  they  then  endeavored  to  help  out  this 
t-eftiraony    by   modelling   the   extraneous    circumftances,     which 

c  -could 


(     xvui     ) 

could  not  be  paired  over,  in  order  to  make  them  coincide  with 
it ;  if,  notwitliftanding  all  this,  difEeulties  ftill  occurred,  they- 
borrowed  Alexander's  fword,  and  cut  the  knot  which  no  milder 
means  could  undo. 

That  this  has   been   the  mode  of  proceeding   hitherto,    it  is 
tinnecefiary  to  prove  here,  as  it   will   be  frequently  done   in  the 
courfe  of  the  work.     Even  hnd  the  imagination  not  magnified  any- 
thing, nor  modelled  cjrcumftances  agreeable  to  its  own  fancy ;  yet 
the    following,    which  is  taken  for   granted,    "    that   tzvo  people- 
"  refembliiig  each  other  in  one  or  tzvo  particulars,  mujl  be  defcendei 
"  from  the  fame  Jlock"  is  an  over-hafty  conclufion.   In  the  firft  place 
rejcA  that  the  moft  different  nations  may  agree  in  fome  points, 
further,   make  the  allowance  for  various  parts  of  the  world  pro-, 
ducing  inhabitants  with  fimilar  fhapes  and  colors,    what  then  re- 
mains to  prove  that  the  Gipfies  are  defcended  from  any  one  of  the.- 
people  which  they  have, been  traced  from.. 

There  is  no  record,  or  hiftorical  fource,  leading  to  a  direfii- 
difcovery  of  the  origin  of  the  Giplies ;  thofe  which  have  beeH' 
thought  fo,  are  not  genuine.  Therefore  nothing  remains,  but 
to  feek  the  truth  through  winding  ways,  by  this  means,  it' 
may  certainly  be  found  :  a  man  muft  not  go  to  tombftones,. 
lately  eredted,  in  German  church  yards,  nor  adduce  a  fingle 
cviftom,  or  the  name  of  a  country  bearing  a  refemblance  to  that 
of  Gipfey,  as  grpunds  of  proof;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  over- 
Ippk    an   hundred   difficulties,    or    even   pofitive    contradidions.. 

But 


But  if  ih  language  of  the  Gipjies,  tkeir  m>ne,  the  conformation  of ' 
their  bodies  and  minds,  their  cujioms  and  religious  principles,  mark 
d  country,  where  it  is  pqffible  for  them  to  have  been  indigenous : 
zvhen  Hiflory  and  Chronology  corroborate  it,  and  there  is  not  any  other 
country  in  the  zvorld,  to  which  the  Gipjies,  all  thefe  particulars  taken 
together,  could  belong .'  Then  the  country,  where  all  thefe  cir- 
cumftances  meet,   muft  be  likewile  their  true  mother  country. 

Whether  their  Hindoftan  origin    has  fo    much    in   its  favor, 
is   more   than    I  will    venture    to    affirm;     as    it   may  be  very 
poffible,  that  I  believe  what  does  not  exift.      The  examination- 
of  judges  muft  determine,  whether,  like  my  predeceflbrs,   I  have 
err&d,    or  have  difcovered  the  truth*. 


Differ tation    on     the    Gipsies. 


SECTION  I. 

Description  of  the  Gipsies,   their  manner  of  life,  their  cujloms 

and  properties.. 

CHAPTER       I. 

Fdrious  appellations  of  thefe  people. 

JL  T  is  no  uncommon  thing,  for  the  fame  people  to  be  called  by 
different  names,  in  different  nations;  this  is  the  cafe  of  the 
Gipfies.  The  French  had  their  firft  accounts  of  them  from 
Bohemia,  which  occafioned  their  giving  them  the  name  of 
(Bohemiens)  ( i )  Bohemians  :  the  Dutch,  fuppofing  they  came 
from  Egypt,  called  them  Heathens  (Heydens.)  In  Denmark, 
Sweden,  and  fome  parts  of  Germany,  Tartars  (2)  were  thought 
of:  the  Moors  and  Arabians,  perceiving  their  propenfity  to 
thieving,  chofe  the  name  Charami  (3)  (robbers)  for  them. 
They  were  formerly  called  Pharaohites,  in  Hungary,  (Pharoah 
nepek,  Pharoah's  people)  and  the  vulgar  in  Tranfilvania,  continue 
that  name  for  them.  (4)  The  Englifh  do  not  differ  much 
from  thefe  latter,  calling  them  Egyptians  (Gipfies),  any  more 
than   the    Portuguefe   and    Spaniards    (Gitanos).    (j)     The  .Cle- 

B  mentines 


(  ^  ) 

Chap.  I.  mentines  in  Syrmia,  ufe  the  appellation,  Madjub,  (6)  and  th^ 
inhabitants  of  the  leffer  Bucharia  that  of  Diajii.  (7)  The  name 
of  Zigeuner  has  extended  itfelf  farther  than  any  other  :  thefe 
people  are  fo  called  not  only  in  all  Germany,  Italy  and  Hungary, 
(tzigany)  but  frequently  in  Tranfilvania,  (8)  Wallachia  and 
Moldavia  (Cyganis).  (9)  Moreover  the  Turks,  and  other  eaftern 
nations  have  no  other  than  this  name  for  them  (10)  (Tfchingenes), 
and  perhaps  the  before  cited  Diajii,  of  the  Bucharians,  may  be 
the  very  fame.  Some  fay  they  call  themfelves  Moors,  (11)  but 
that  is  falle,  as  Moor  is  not  the  name  of  any  people,  it  is  only  an 
adjund  :  (12)  it  is  really  a  pity,  fmce  this  name  would  have  been 
fo  fair  a  pretence  to  make  Amorites  of  them,  as  fome  writers 
have  done.  It  is  not  by  any  means  proved,  that  the  modern 
Greeks  called  them  Athingans;  (13)  this  opinion  refts  more  on 
the  arbitrary  afTertions  of  fome  learned  men,  than  on  real  fafts  : 
which  is  alfo  the  cafe  with  the  reft  of  the  catalogue  of  nanies, 
that  have  been  difperfed,  in  various  treatifes  on  the  origin  of  the 
Gipfies ;  as  will  be  demonftrated  farther  on. 

CHAPTER       II. 

On  the  difperfion  of  the  Gipfies,  and  their  numbers  in  Europe. 

JL  T  is  incredible  how  numerous  thefe  people  are,  and  how  wide 
they  have  difperfed  themfelves  over  the  face  of  the  Earth.  They 
wander  about  in  Afia ;  ( i )  in  the  interior  part  of  Africa,  they 
plunder  the  merchants  of  Agades;  (2)  and,  like  locufts,  have 
overrun  moft  European  countries.  America  feems  to  be  the  only 
part  of  the  world,  where  they  are  not  known,  as  I  find  no  mention 
made  of  them,  by  any  writer  on  that  quarter  of  the  globe.     I 

flrall 


C     3     ) 

fHall  not  detain  my  reader  with  the  hlftory  of  thofe  in  Afia  and  '  Chap.  II. 
Africa ;  as  we  have  not  any   minute  accounts  of  them ;  but  will 
confine  myfelf  to  thofe  in  Europe. 

There  are  but  few  countries,  here,  which  are  entirely  free  from 
Gipfies ;  although,  for  centuries,  every  ftate  has  been  endeavouring 
to  rid  itfclf  of  them.  Under  King  Henry  VIII.  (3)  and  Queen 
Elizabeth,  (4)  they  were  fet  up  as  a  mark  for  general  perfecution 
in  England :  there  are,  neverthelefs,  great  numbers  ftill  to  be  found 
there  :  (5)  feven  or  eight  years  ago,  they  even  threatened  to 
fet  the  town  of  Northampton  on  fire,  becaufe  the  magiftrates 
had  arrefted  fome  of  their  young  people,  whofe  releafe  they 
foUicited  in  vain  :  feveral  of  them  were  hanged  for  it :  they  had 
in  the  mean  time  (hewn  plainly,  that  their  race  was  nothing 
lefs  than  annihilated.  It  is  not  uncommon,  in  the  county  of 
Bedford  particularly,  to  fee  them  lying,  in  bye  places,  to  the 
number  of  forty  or  fifty  together :  but  they  are  cautious  how  they 
travel  about  in  companies,  and  are  rarely  feen,  in  towns  or  villages 
but  by  one  at  a  time. 

Spain  contains  fo  many  of  thefe  people,  efpecially  in  the 
fouthern  provinces,  that  they  go  about  in  large  troops ;  threat- 
ening to  plunder  and  murder  travellers,  whom  they  happen  to 
meet,  in  lonely  places,  where  there  is  no  city,  nor  any  place  of 
refuge  near.  (6) 

Swinburne  rates  their  number  very  high,  affuring  us,  that 
the  lofs  of  the  Gipfies  would  only  be  perceived  by  the  apparent 
diminution  of  population.  (7)  Now  as  Spain  contains  eleven 
millions  of  people,  how  confiderable  a  draft  mufl;  it  be  to  render 
it  perceptible.    Twifs  alfo  mentions  a  great  many,  but  fums  up 

B  2.  a  determinate. 


\ 


X     4     ) 

Ghap.  -11.  a  determinate  quantity,  40,000;  (8)  which  is  a  great  number  to 
be  lure,  but  certainly  rather  twice  twenty,  or  even  twice  forty 
thoufand  too  few,  than  a  man  too  many ;  unlefs  we  charge 
Swinburne  and  others,  with  having  greatly  exceeded,  even  admit- 
ting, that  he  means  to  be  underftood  as  fpeaking  of  the  fouthern 
provinces  only. 

In  France  they  are  rather  fcarce,  for  the  obvious  reafon,  that 
every  Gipfey  who  can  be  apprehended,  falls  a  facrifice  to  the  police. 
Lorrain  and  AU'atia  are  indeed  exceptions,  they  being  very  nume- 
rous there,  efpecially  in  the  forefts  of  Lorrain.  Here  they  feem 
to  meet  with  milder  treatment,  yet,  according  to  the  affurances  of 
a  traveller,  many  of  them  are  to  be  found  in  the  goals  of  Lorrain. 
They  have  increafed  the  more  in  this  diftrift,  in  confequence  of 
the  late  Duke  of  Deuxponts'  having  been  very  affiduous  in  looking 
after,  and  driving  them  from  his  dominions ;  whither  the  prefent 
duke  will  not  fuffer  them  to  return. 

-I  now  come  to  Italy,  where  they  are  univerfally  to  be  found, 
infomuch  that,  as  I  am  informed,  even  Sicily  and  Sardinia  are  not 
free.  They  are  moft  numerous  in  the  dominions  of  the  Church  ; 
I  prefume,  hecauCc  there  is  the  worft  police,  and  much  fuperftition. 
The  former  does  not  difhirb,  and  the  latter  entices  them  to  deceive 
the  ignorant,  as  it  affords  them  an  opportunity  to  make  a  plentiful 
harveft  by  their  fortune  telling,  and  enchanted  amulets.  There  is 
a  general  law  throughout  Italy,  that  no  Gipfey  fliall  remain  more 
than  two  nights  (9)  in  any  one  place  :  by  this  regulation,  it  is 
true,  no  place  retains  its  gueft  long,  but  no  fooner  is  one  gone, 
ihan  another  comes  in  his  room  :  it  is  a  continvial  circle,  and  quite 
cs  convenient   to  them  as  .a  perfeft  toleration  would  he.     Italy 

rather 


(     5     ) 

rather  fulfers  than  profits  by  this  law,  as,  by  keeping  thcfe  people     Chap.  II- 

in  continual  motion,  they  do  more  mil'chief  there  than  in  other 

places. 

They  are  very  fcarce  in  many  parts  of  Germany;  as  well  .as 
in  Switzerland  and  the  Low  Countries.  A  man  may  live  many 
years  in  Upper  Saxony,  or  in  the  diftridls  of  Hanover  and 
Brunfwic,  without  feeing  a  fingle  Gipfey  :  when  one,  by  chance, 
ftrays  into  a  village  or  town,  he  makes  as  much  difturbance  as  if 
the  black  gentleman  appeared,  with  his  cloven  foot ;  he  frights 
children  from  their  play,  and  draws  the  attention  of  the  older 
people,  till  the  police  officers  get  hold  of  him,  and  make  him 
again  invifible.  On  the  contrary,  in  other  provinces,  particularly 
on  the  Rhine,  a  Gipfey  is  a  very  common  fight.  A  few  years  ago 
there  were  fuch  numbers  of  them  in  the  Dutchy  of  Wurtemburg, 
that  they  were  lying  about  every  where :  but  as  they  either, 
according  to  cuftom,  lived  by  thieving,  by  fortune  telling  or  other 
tricks,  plundering  the  common  people  of  their  money,  the  prefent 
Duke  ordered  fome  hundred  foldiers,  to  drive  them  from  their 
holes  and  lurking  places,  throughout  his  country,  then  tranfported 
the  congregated  fwarm  out  of  his  dominions,  juft  in  the  fame 
manner  as  was  above  related,  that  they  were  treated  by  the  Duke 
of  Deuxponts. 

I  do  not  know  how  they  are  fituated  in  Poland. 

That  they  are  to  be  found  in  Denmark,  (lo)  Sweden,  (ii) 
-and  Ruffia,  (12)  is  certain,  but  how  numerous  they  are  in  thofe 
countries  I  cannot  affirm.  I  fliall  therefore  proceed  to  the  South 
■Eaft    part    of   Eitrope. 

Thefe 


(     6     ) 

Chap.  II.  Thefe  countries  feem  to  be  the  general  rendezvous  of  the- 
Gipfies  ;  their  number  amounts  in  Hungary,  according  to  a  writtea- 
account  I  have  before  me,  to  upwards  of  50,000  :  (13)  and  in  the 
diftrifts  of  the  Banat,  Grifellini  (14)  aflures  us,  that  when  Count 
Clary  occupied  the  place  of  Prefident,  they  were  reckoned  to  be 
5500  :  yet  they  appear  to  be  ftill  more  numerous  in  Tranfilvania. 
It  is  not  only  Mr.  Benko,  who  fays  they  fwarm  upon  the  land 
like  locufls,  (15)  but  I  have  alfo  a  certain  calculation  from 
Hermanftadt,  wherein  their  numbers  are  eftimated  at  between  35 
and   36,000. 

Cantemir  fays  the  Gipfies  are  difperfed  all  over  Moldavia,  where 
every  Baron  has  feveral  families  of  them  fubjeft  to  him;  (16) 
in  Wallachia,  and  the  Sclavonian  (17)  countries,  they  are  quite 
as  numerous.  In  Wallachia  and  Moldavia  they  arc  divided  into 
two  clafles,  the  princely  and  bojarifh,  the  former,  according  to 
Sulzer,  amount  to  many  thoufands,  but  that  is  a  mere  trifle,  in 
comparifon  of  the  latter  :  there  is  not  a  fingle  bojar  in  Wallachia, 
but  has  at  leaft  three  or  four  of  them  for  flaves,  the  rich  have  often 
fome  hundreds  each,    under  their  command. 

Beflarabia,  all  Tartary,  Bulgaria,  Greece,  and  Romania,  fwarm 
(18)  with  them;  even  in  Conftantinople  (19)  they  are  innumerable. 
In  Romania,  a  large  trad  of  Mount  Hsmus,  which  they  inhabit, 
has  acquired  from  them,  the  name  'Tfchenghe  Falkan^  (Gipfey 
Mountain.)  This  diftrift  extends  from  the  city  Aydos,  quite  to 
Philippopolis,  and  contains  more  Gipfies  than  any  other  province 
in  the   Turkifli  empire.    (20) 

From  what  has  been  advanced,  the  reader  will  be  enabled  to 
form  fome  conception,  how  confiderable  a  fet  of  people  the  Gipfies 

are. 


(     7     ) 

are  in  Europe,  independent  of  the  numbers  that  are  in  (21)  Egypt,     Chap.  II. 
and  fome  parts  of  Alia. 

If  we  had  an  exadt  eftimate  of  ihem  in  the  different  countries, 
or  if  the  unfettled  life  of  diefe  people,  did  not  render  it  extreamly 
difficult  to  procure  fuch  an  one ;  the  immenfe  number  would 
greatly  exceed  what  we  have  any  idea  of.  At  a  moderate  calcula- 
tion, without  being  at  all  extravagant,  they  might  be  reckoned  at 
■between  7  and  800,000.  What  a  ferious  matter  of  confideration, 
when  we  refleft,  that  the  greateft  part  of  thefe  people  are  idlers, 
cheats  and  thieves  ?  What  a  field  does  this  open  for  many  a 
government's  contemplation  ?  but  more  of  this  in  another 
place. 

CHAPTER       III. 

The    properties    of    their    bodies. 


H 


A  D  the  Giplies  made  no  more  than  a  temporary  appear- 
ance, and  we  could  only  be  acquainted  with  them,  from  the  annual 
publications  of  former  centuries ;  it  would  be  difficult  to  form 
any  other  idea,  than  that  they  were  a  herd  of  Monfters  and 
Beelzebubs.  We  find  in  thofe  books,  frequent  mention  made  of  a 
favage  people,  black  ( i )  horrid  men.  But  now  that  they  have  continued 
to  our  time,  and  we  have  an  opportunity  of  feeing,  with  our  own 
eyes,  hew  tlKy  are  formed,  and  what  appearance  they  make,  they 
are  fo  fortunate,  as  to  have  authors,  who  commend  their  beauty, 
and  take  great  pains  to  fet  forth  their  advantages ;  though  (2) 
many,  indeed  moft  of  the  moderns,  their  color  and  looks  being  the 
lame,  (3)  perfedly  agree  v/ith  the  writers  of  paft  centuries,  in  their 

accounts 


C     8     ) 

CtK'.p.  IJI,  accounts  of  them.  Both  parties  are  in  the  right,  when  we  confider, 
that  what  appears  beautifbl  in  the  eyes  of  one  perfon,  is  poffibly' 
ugly  and  deformed  in  the  eyes  of  another :  tliis  depends  entirely 
upon  u!e.  For  this  reafon  their  dark  brown,  or  olive  colored  Ikin,- 
with  their  white  teeth  appearing  between  their  red  lips,  may  be 
a  difgufting  light  to  an  European,  unaccuftomed  to  fee  fucii' 
piftures.  Let  me  only  afk  if,  as  children,  we  have  not  at  fome 
time  or  other  run  affrighted  from  a  Glpfey  ?  The  cafe  is  entirely 
altered,  if  we  only  diveft  ourfelves  of  the  idea  that  a  black  Ikin  is' 
"lifagreeable.  Their  white  teeth,  their  long  black  hair,  on  which' 
rhey  pride  themfelves  very  highly,  and  will  not  permit  to  be  cut 
off,  their  lively  black  rolling  eyes,  are,  without  difpute,  properties, 
which  mufh  be  ranked  among  the  lift  of  beauties,  even  by  the 
modern  civilized  European  world.  They  are  neither  overgrown 
giants,  nor  diminutive  dwarfs ;  their  limbs  are  formed  in  the  jufteft 
proportion.  Large  bellies  are,  among  them,  as  uncommon  as 
liump  backs,  blindnefs  or  other  corporal  defefts.  When  Grifellint 
afferts  that  tlie  breafts  of  the  Gipfey  women,  at  the  time  of  their 
jiurftng,  increafe  to  a  larger  fize  than  the  child  they  give  fuck  to, 
it  is  an  affcrtion  deRitute  of  proof,  and  juft  as  true  as  many  other 
arguments  he  adduces  to  prove  the  Giplies  are  Egyptians.  Pro- 
bably he  may  have  confounded  himfelf,  by  thinking  of  the 
Hottentots,  that  circumftance  being  true  of  them,  though  not 
of  the  (4)  Gipfies.  Every  Gipfey  (1^)  is  naturally  endued  with 
agility,  great  fupplenefs,  and  the  free  ufe  of  his  limbs :  thefe 
qualities  are  perceptible  in  his  whole  deportment,  but  in  an 
extraordinary  degree,    whenever  he   happens  to  be   furprized  in 

an. 


C     9     ) 

an  improper  place  :    in  the  aft  of  thieving,  with  a  flolen  goofe     Chap.  III. 

or  fowl   in  his  hand,  he  runs  off  fo  nimbly,  that  unlefs  his  purfuer 

be  on  (6)  horfeback,  the  Gipfey  is  fure  to  efcape.     Thefe  people 

are  blefled  with    an   aftonifhing   good   fiiate  of  health.     Neither 

wet  nor  dry  weather,  heat  nor  cold,  let  the  extreams  follow  each 

other  never  fo  quick,  feem  to  have  any  effetfl  on  them.     Gipfies 

are  fond  of  a  great  degree  of  heat ;  it  is  their  grcatefh  luxury  to 

lie  day  and  night  fo  near  the  fire,  as  to  be  in  danger  of  burning ; 

at  the  fame  time  they  can  bear  to  travel,  in  the  fevereft  cold  and 

froft  bareheaded,  with  no  other  covering  than  a  torn  fliirr  or  fome 

old  rags,  careleflly  thrown  over  them,  without  fear  of  catching 

cold,  cough,  or  any  other  diforder.  (7) 

If  we  endeavour  to  difcover  the  caufes  of  thefe  bodily  qualities 
of  the  Gipfies,  we  find  them,  or  at  leaft,  fome  of  them,  very 
evidently  in  their  education  and  manner  of  life.  They  are  lean, 
but  how  ftiould  they  be  corpulent,  as  they  are  not  guilty  of  excefs 
in  eating  or  drinking ;  for  if  they  get  a  full  meal  to  day,  they  muft 
not  repine,  if  they  fhould  be  vinder  the  neceffity  of  keeping  ftrift 
faft  tomorrow,  and  the  next  day.  They  have  iron  conftitutions, 
becaufe  they  have  been  brought  up  hardily.  The  pitilefs  mother, 
takes  her  three  months  old  child  upon  her  back,  wanders 
about  in  fair  or  foul  weather,  in  heat  or  cold,  without  troubling 
her  head  what  may  happen  to  it.  When  a-  boy  comes  to  be  three 
years  old,   his   lot  is  ftill  harder.     While  an  infant,  and  his  age  ■ 

reckoned  by  weeks  and  months,  he  was  at  leafi:  wrapped  up  clofc 
in  rags  :  but  now,  deprived  even  of  thofe,  he  becomes,  equally 
with  his  parents,  expofed  to  the  rigour  of  the  elements,  for  want 
of  covering  ;  he  is  now  put  to  the  trial  how  far  his  legs  will  carry 

C  him,. 


C      fo     ) 

Ciiip.  in.  him,  and  miifl;  be  content  to  walk  on  the  ice  in  the  froft,  witJi 
no  other  defence  for  his  feet  than  thin  focks.  Thus  he  grows 
up,  and  attains  his  good  health  by  hardlhip  and  mifery  :  We  may 
as  eafily  account  for  the  colour  of  their  flcin.  The  Laplanders, 
Samoyeds,  as  well  as  the  Siberians,  have  brown,  yellow  colored  fkins, 
in  confequence  of  living,  from  their  childhood,  in  fmoak  and  dirt 
as  the  Gipfies  do  :  thefe  would,  long  ago,  have  got  rid  of  their 
fwarthy  complexions,  if  they  had  difcontinued  their  Gipfey  manner 
of  living.  Obferve  only  a  Gipfey  from  his  birth,  till  he  comes  to 
man's  eftate,  and  one  muft  be  convinced,  that  their  color  is  not,  fo 
much,  owing  to  their  defcent,  as  to  the  naftinefs  of  their  bodies. 
In  fummer  the  child  is  expofed  to  the  fcorching  fun,  in  winter  it 
is  fliut  up  in  a  fmoaky  hut.  Some  mothers  fmear  their  children 
over  with  a  black  ointment,  and  leave  them  to  fry  in  the  fun  or 
near  the  fire.  (8).  Theyfeldom  trouble  themfelves  about  walliing, 
or  other  modes  of  cleaning  themfelves.  Experience  alfo  Ihews  us 
that  it  is  more  education  and  manner  of  life,  than  defcent,  which 
has  propagated  this  black  color  of  the  Gipfies,  from  generation  to 
generation.  Among  thofe'  who  profefs  mufic  in  Hungary,  or  ferve 
in  the  Imperial  army,  where  they  have  learnt  to  pay  more  attention 
to  order  and  cleanlinefs,  there  are  many  to  be  found,  whofe  ex- 
traftion  is  not  at  all  difcernible  in  their  (9)  color.  As  they  had, 
probably,  remained  to  the  age  of  twelve  or  fourteen  years,  under 
the  care  of  their  filthy  parents ;  they  muft  neceflarily  have  borne 
the  marks  of  the  dirt  contrafted  during  thefe  fourteen  years,  when 
they  firft  began  to  adopt  a  different  mode  of  life.  How  much  lefs 
then,  Ihould  we  be  able  to  diftinguifli  a  Gipfey,  if  taken  when  a 
child  from  its  lluttifh  mother,  and  brovight  up  under  fome  cleanly 

perfon. 


perfon.     In  trie  fame  manner,  we  may  account  for  their  white  teeth    Chap.  ITI. 
and  found  limbs,    from  their  manner  of  life.     The  former  are 
evidences  of  their  fpare  diet,  the  latter  prove  them  to  have  been 
reared  more  according  to  the  didlates  of  nature,  than  thofe  of  art, 
and  tendernefs.  r 

CHAPTER       IV. 

On    tkeir  food   and   beverage. 


T. 


HOSE  among  them,  who  are  more  connefted  with  civilized- 
people,  are  not  remarkable  in  their  diet ;  though  it  is  to  be 
obferved  .of  them,  as  well  as  other  Gipfies,  that  they  are  not  at 
all  neat  in  their  cookery.  The  others,  on  the  contrary,  have 
their  table  furniilied  in  a  very  extraordinary  way.  Sometimes  they 
faft,  or  at  beft,  have  only  bread  and  water  to  fubfift  upon,  at  other 
times  they  regale  on  fowls  and  geefe.  It  is  a  great  feaft  to  them, 
whenever  they  can  procure  a  roaft,  of  cattle  that  have  died  of  any 
diftemper.  It  js  all  one  to  them,  whether  it  be  the  carrion  of  a 
fheep,  hog,  cow,  or  other  beaft,  horfe  flefl^  only  excepted  :  they 
are  fo  far  from  being  difgufted  with  it,  that  to  eat  their  fill  of  fuch 
a  meal,  is  to  them  the  height  of  epicurifm.  When  any  one 
cenfures  their  tafte,  or  fhews  furprife  at  it,  they  anfwer,  "  the 
"  flefh  of  a  beaft  which  God  (i)  kills,  muft  be  better  than  of  one 
"  killed  by  the  hand  of  nian."^  They  therefore  take  every  oppor- 
tunity of  getting  fuch  dainties.  That  they  take  carrion  from  a 
layftall,  as  is  affirmed  of  the  Gipfies  in  Hungary,  (2)  is  by  no 
means  certain,  any  more  than  that  they  eat  horfe  fledi.  (3)     Bui;. 

C  z  if 


(    12    ) 

Chnp.  I\'-  if  a  beaft,  out  of  im  herd  dies,  and  they  find  it  before  it  becomes 
rotten  and  piitrified  ;  or  if  a  fiirmer  gives  them  notice  of  a  cow 
dead  (4)  in  the  flable,  they  proceed  without  helitation,  to  get 
pofleffion  of  their  booty.  Their  favourite  objeft  is  animals,  that 
have  been  deftroyed  by  fire,  therefore,  whenever  a  conflagration 
has  happened,  either  in  town  or  country,  the  next  day  the  Gipfies, 
from  every  neighbouring  quarter,  aflemble  and  draw  the  fuftbcated, 
half  confumed  beafbs  out  of  the  afhes.  Men,  women  and  children, 
in  troops,  are  extreamly  bufy,  joyfully  carrying  the  flefh  home  to 
their  dwelling  places :  they  return  feveral  times,  provide  themfelves 
plentifully  with  this  roaft  meat,  and  gluttonize  in  their  huts,  as 
long  as  their  noble  fare  lafts.  (5)  The  manner  of  dreffing  this 
delicious  food,  is  curious,  they  boil  or  roaft  what  is  intended  for 
the  firft  day,  if  they  have  more  than  they  can  confume  at  once, 
the  remainder  is  either  dried  in  the  fun,  or  fmoaked  in  their  huts, 
then  eaten  without  any  farther  preparation.  (6) 

I  might  here  introduce  fomething  concerning  their  tafte  for 
human  flefh,  and  adduce  as  proofs,  the  inftances  which  have  lately 
happened  in  Hungary,  (7)  were  I  not  apprehenfive  it  might  be 
objefted,  that  thefe  examples  are  different  from  common  experience, 
as  well  as  from  the  old  accounts,  handed  down  to  us,  concerning 
thefe  people.  I  fhall,  therefore,  not  infift  on  this  article,  but 
entirely  give  up  the  point,  of  Gipfies  being  men  eaters,  except  juft 
hinting,  that  it  would  be  expedient  for  governments  to  be  watchful. 
The  inftances,  in  Hungary,  do  not  appear,  by  any  means,  fo 
cafual  and  uncommon,  as  people  may  imagine.  AVhat,  according  to 
the  niceft  examination  has  been  done,  not  by  o/ic  but  k'uihj,  not  by 
ten,  but  even  two  hundred,  and  perhaps  by  tkoufands ;  not  yejlerday 

and 


(    15    )       ^ 

•    ■  .  Chap.  I\ 

antl  to  dav,  but  many  years   back;    finally,   not  by  the  whole  body 
together,     but    fmgle    parties    by    them/elves,    in    different    places  ; 
Ihall  thefe  things  be  deemed  only  cafual  exceffes  ?  Should   it  be 
aflerted,   in  addition  to  this,  that  the  eating  human  flcfli  is  in  u(e, 
and  an  allowed  thing,   in  the  country  from  whence  they  originate; 
we  might  with  greater  probability  mention  this  fhocking  faft,  ot 
feeding  on  human  fleih,  as  a  prevailing  cuftom  among  the  Gipfies. 
This  is   expreffly   mentioned   in   hiftories,    which  affure  us,  chat 
among    the  particular  clafs  of  people,  from  whom   the    Gipf.e^ 
fpring,  it  is  a  long  eftabliflied  habit,  for  the  neareft  relations  and 
friends,  to  kill  and  eat  each  other.     I  (ball  not  bring  proof  of  ir 
in  this  place,  as  it  belongs  to  the  fecond  feftion  :  let  it  fuffice,  jufi 
to  have  hinted  the  matter,  in  order  that  it  may  be  known,  towards 
what  people  we  are  to  look  for  the  Gipfws.     As  to  the  objeftion, 
that  among  all  the  crimes  with  which  they  have  been  charged,  in 
•the  older  writings,   eating  human  fieJJ:  is  not   pofitively  alledged 
againft  them,  it  may  be  obviated  by  more  than  one  anfwer.     In 
the  firft  place  let  it  be  attended  to,  hiftory  relates,  and  the  event 
in  Hungary    confirms,    that  they   murder  one  another;    further, 
confider  their  wandering  way  of  life ;  laftly,  that  they  generally 
abide  in  bye  places ;   and   it  may  all  be  eafdy  accounted  for.     An 
hundred  fathers  may  facrifice  their  children  to  their  voluptuoufnefs, 
and  the  crime  as  often  remain   concealed.     The   abfent   perfon   is 
not  mifled,  as  nobody  watches  over  a  family,  continually  in  motion, 
and  every  where  a  ftranger.     Juft  as  unlikely  is  it,  that  government 
Ihould  be  informed  of  it ;  they  cannot  attend  to  ^^'hat  is  tranfafted 
in  corners,  at  a  diftance  from  their  place  of  refidence.     There  is 
no  reafon  to  fuppofo  any  of  their  o^vn  people  ftould  think  it  their 

dutv 


(     H     ) 

Chap.  IV.  duty  to  inform,  as. not  being  contrary  to  their  ufual  praclicc,  tiia,y 
do  not  efteem  it  wrong.  It  is  very  poflible  for  them  to  have 
deftroyed  many  others,  without  being  recorded  in  the  courts  of 
juftice,  or  jioticed  in  the  annual  publications.  Who  ever  thought 
to  enquire  of  them,  after  any  traveller,  who,  far  diftant  from  his 
own  country,  might  have  fallen  into  their  hands  and  been  cut  off. 
Or  how  are  the  remains  of  the  poor  vidim  to  be  traced,  if  they 
devour  what  is  eatable,  and  burn  the  bones.  (8)  Thofe  Hunga- 
rian wretches,  have,  according  to  their' own  account,  for  twelve 
years  gratified  their  horrid  cravings,  undifcovered  by  the  magif- 
trates,  in  a  country  where  the  police  is  by  no  means  bad  :  perhaps 
they  might  have  gone  on  unfufpefted  for  ever,  had  they  not  laid 
their  unlucky  hands  on  the  people  of  the  country,  thereby  bring.- 
ing  on  a  ftr,i(ft  enquiry,  and  rendering  the  difcovery  more  eafy. 
Nor  do  the  older  writings  feem  to  be  entirely  filent  on  this  head, 
at  leaft  there  is  an  appearance  of  fomething  of  the  kind  in  them. 
Many  authors  mention  the  Gipfies  ftealing  people,  and  accufe 
them  particularly  of  .lying  in  wait  for  young  children.  (9)  Others 
again  deny  this,  faying,  that  the  Gipfies  have  brats  enough  of 
their  own,  therefore  need  covet  nothing  lefs  than  ftrange  chil^ 
dren.  (10)  How  does  it  look,  if  we  fuppofe  they  did  not  want 
to  rear  thefe  children,  but  to  facrifice  them  to  their  inordinate 
appetite,  and  the  Hvingarian  intelligence  expreffly  fays,  they  were 
particularly  fond  of.,  young,  fubjecls.  What  renders  the  truth  of 
this  accufation,  in  the  old  writings  fufpicious,  is,  that  before  even 
a  fingle  Gipfey  had  fet  his  foot  in  Europe,  the  Jews  lay  under  the 
fame  imputation.  (11)  Perhaps  in  this,  as  in  manv  other  inftances, 
the  calumny  invented  againft  the  Jews,   might  be  transferred  tp 

th<i 


(     '5     ) 

the  Gipfies  alio.  This  alone  confidered,  the  imputation  of  kid-  Chap.  IV. 
napping  children  might  become  doubtful,  but  then  occurs  the 
weighty  circumflance,  that  it  has  been  judicially  proved  in 
England ;  and,  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  an  aft  of  parli- 
ament was  palfed  on  the  occafion.  (12)  Enough  of  this;  let 
people  realon  upon  the  cannibal  appetite  of  the  Gipfies  as  they 
will,  from  what  has  been  faid,  there  will  always  remain  ground 
for  fufpicion. 

After  having  (hewn  how  little  nice  they  are  in  their  appetites, 
we  Ihould  fcarcely  expert  to  find  them  fqueamifli,  with  regard  to 
thofe  things  which  are  highly  eftcemed  among  civilized  people. 
Grifelini  gives  a  long  catalogue  of  articles  of  diet,  which  are 
dlfagreeable  to  a  Gipfey's  palate.  Not  to  mention  beans  and  oniorts, 
the  other  rejected  meats  are  by  no  means  trifling,  viz.  red  bream, 
pcarch,  lampreys,  Avltli  every  kind  of  Avild  fowl.  (13)  This 
aflTertion  is  very  dubious,  for  Gipfies  not  only  do  eat  beans  and 
onions,  but  are  very  fond  of  them,  (14)  and  as  for  the  red  bream, 
pheafants,  partridges,  peairch  and  lampreys,  their  only  reafon  fdr 
abftaining  from  them,  is  the  difficulty  of  procuring  them :  in  that 
they  are  in  the  fame  predicament  with  many  other  people. 

The  Gipfies  are  not  much  accuftomed  to  baking  of  bread, 
that  is  an  article  which  they  buy,  beg,  fteal,  or  go  entirdy  with- 
out. If  by  chance  they  do  bake,  it  is  done  quite  in  the  eaftern 
method.  A  wood  fire  is  made  on  the  ground,  which  foon  becomes 
embers,  in  the  mean  time  the  mother  kneads  her  dough,  forms 
it; into  fmall  cakes,  Ifys  them  en  the  hot  \aihes,  which  bake 
them,  (i  ;) 

h 


(     i6     ) 

Chap.  lY.  It  is  no  part  of  their  politenefs  to  eat  with  a  knife  and  fork, 
to  ufe  a  table  or  plate,  even  a  difii  is  by  no  means  univerfal  among 
them.  Their  whole  kitchen  and  table  apparatus,  confift  of  an 
earthern  pot,  an  iron  pan,  which,  alfo  ferves  for  a  dilh,  a  knife 
and  a  fpoon.  When  the  meal  is  ready,  the  whole  family  fit 
around  the  pot  or  pan,  the  boiled  or  roaft  is  divided  into  pieces, 
on  which  they  fall  to  ;  their  fingers  and  teeth,  ferving  them  for 
knives  and  forks,  as  does  the  ground  for  table  and  plates.  ( 1 6) 

The  common  drink  of  the  Gipiies  is  water, ;  now  and  then  beer 
when  it  cofts  them  nothing.  Wine  is  too  coftly,  nor  is  it  particu- 
larly grateful  to  them.  The  cafe  is  very  different  when  (17)  brandy 
comes  in  queftion,  which  they  love  immoderately.  They  like  to 
intoxicate  themfeives,  which  being  eafieft,  and  foonefl  effefted 
with  brandy,  it  is  in  their  efteem.  the  only  liquor  worth  purchafmg, 
all  they  can  earn  goes  that  way ;  whenever  by  chance  they  become 
poffefTed  of  a  penny,  it  is  expended  at  the  tieft  houle  where 
brandy  (18)  is  to  be  met  with.  Every  chriftening,  wedding,  or 
other  occafion  of  rejoicing,,  is  folemnized  with  brandy.  If  they 
have  plenty  of  li;  they  carry  the  world  before  them,  each  tries, 
by  fcreaming  or  hallowing,  to  exprefs  his  felicity,  and  fhew 
how  perfeft  his  happinefs  is.  (19) 

Notwithfl:anding  the  great  thirft  the  Gipfies  have  for  brandy, 
it  is  even  exceeded  by  their  immoderate  love  for  tobacco.  This 
is  nor,  as  one  fliould  fuppofe,  peculiar  to  the  men ;  for  the 
women  fbmetimes  exceed  them  in  it  :  they  not  only  fmoak  it, 
but  chew  and  fwallow  the  very  leaves  and  flalks,  with  great 
avidity.  In  order  that  it  may  the  fooner  reach  its  place  of  defti- 
aation,  and  fhimulate  the  gums  and  tongue   more  forcibly,  they 

make 


(   n  ) 

make  ufe  of  a  pipe  not  longer  than  one's  finger ;  this  pipe  is  made     Chap.  V. 

of  wood,  for  oeconomical  reafons,  as  it  abforbs  the  moifture,  and 

thereby  becomes  a  very  great  Gipfey  delicacy,  for  having  fmoaked 

it  as  long  as  they  chufe,  they  gnaw  it  with  aftonifliing  greed incfs, 

till  not  a  fplinter  remains.     It  is  immaterial,  whether  the  pipe  be 

fmoaked  by    the    perfon   himfelf  or  another,  to  bring  it  to   the 

proper  degree  of  perfeftion.     He  accepts  it,  as  a  valuable  prefent 

from  any  body,  and  is  fo  choice  of  it,  that  it  frequently  lafts  him 

many  days.     He  will  abftain  from  food  for  more  than  a  day,  when 

he  can  procure  a  leaf  of  tobacco,  or  a  piece  of  his  pungent  pipe,. 

which  he  chews,  drinks  a  little  water,  and  is  happy.  (20)     This- 

furely  exceeds  every  thing   one   has  heard,  of  the  moft  famous 

fraoaker, 

CHAPTER       V. 

On     the     drefs     of    the     Gipjies^ 


Ti 


HERE  is  no  reafon  to  expeft,  that  the  defcription  of  the,- 
drefs  of  a  fet  of  people,  whofe  whole  oeconomy  belongs  to  the 
clafs  of  beggars,  (liould  exhibit  any  thing  but  poverty  and  want.. 
The  firft  of  them  which  came  to  Europe,  appeared  ragged  and 
miferable,  (i)  unlefs  we  perhaps  allow  their  leaders  to  have  been 
an  exception,  (2)  in  like  manner  their  defcendants  have  made  fliift 
for  hundreds  of  years,  and  ftill  do.  This  is  remarkable  in  the 
countries  about  the  mouth  of  the  Danube,  which  abound  with 
Gipfies,  namely  Tranfilvania,  Hungary,  and  Turkey  in  Europe, 
where  they  drefs  |nore  negligently,  than  in  any  part  of  Germany. 

D  The 


(     '8     ) 

Chap.  V.  "The  Gipfies  efteem  a  covering  for  the  head  a  vety  ufelefs  thing  : 
the  wind  will  not  eafily  blow  his  hat  off,  who  never  wears  any 
thing  of  the  kind,  except  when  he  has  a  mind  to  make  a  figure, 
even  then  a  rough  cap  (3)  fupplies  the  place  of  one.  The 
covering  for  his  feet  alfo  does  not  coft  him  much.  In  winter, 
provided  the  female  Gipfies  do  not  knit  focks,  which  their  women 
in  Moldavia  and  Wallachia  do,  with  wooden  (4)  needles,  they 
wind  a  couple  of  rags  round  the  feet,  which  in  fummer  they  lay 
afide  as  unneceflary.  (5)  They  are  not  better  provided  with  linen, 
as  the  women  neither  fpin,  few,  nor  wafh.  For  want  of  change, 
what  he  once  puts  on  his  body,  remains  there  till  it  rots  and  falls 
off  >of  itfelf.  (6)  His  whole  drefs  often  confifts  of  only  a  pair  of 
breeches   and  a   torn  fliirt. 

We  are  not  to  fuppofe  that  the  Gipfies  drefs  fo  ill  becaufe  they 
are  indifferent  about  it,  on  the  contrary,  they  iove  fine  cloaths  to 
an  extravagant  degree  :  the  want  proceeds  from  neceffity,  which  is 
become  a  fecond  nature,  forgetting  that  labour  and  care  are  the 
means  to  procure,  as  well  cloaths  as  nourifhment.  Whenever  an 
opportunity  offers  of  acquiring  a  good  coat,  either  by  gift,  pur- 
chafe,  or  theft,  he  immediately  beftirs  himfelf  to  become  mafter  of 
it,  he  puts  it  on  direftly,  without  attending,  in  the  leaft,  to 
whether  it  futes  the  reft  of  his  apparel.  If  his  dirty  fliirt  had  holes 
in  it  as  big  as  a  barn  door,  or  his  breeches  v/ere  fo  out  of  condition, 
that  one  might  perceive  their  antiquity  at  the  firft  glance;  were  he 
unprovided  with  fhoes,  ftockings,  or  a  hat,  it  would  not  prevent 
his  ftrutting  about  in  a  laced  coat,  and  valuing  himfelf  the  more 
upon  it,  in  cafe  it  happened  to  be  a  red  one.  Martin  Kelpius 
rjierefore  fays,    that  the  Gipfies  in  Tranfilvania,,  fpend  all  their 

earnings 


C     ^9     ) 

♦earnings  in  akhoufes  and  in  cloaths.     Their  drefs  is  fo  particular,     Chap.  Vh 
that  it  would  excite  laughter  in  the  fterneft  philofopher,  to  fee  a 
Gipfey  parading  about,  with  a  beaver  hat,  a  fdk  or  red  cloth  coat, 
at  the  fame  time  his  breeches  torn,  and  his  fhoes  or  boots  covered 
with  patches.  (7)      , 

Benko  alfo  aflures  us,  that  this  kind  of  ftate  is  common  iu 
Tranfilvania,  and  adds,  the  Gipfies  are  particularly  fond  of  cloaths 
made  after  the  Hungarian  fafhion,  or  which  had  been  worn  by 
people  of  diftindit)n  (8).  All  this  is  equally  the  cafe  with  refpeft 
to  the  Gipfies  in  Hungary.  I  fhall  tranfcribe  rhe  whole  paflage 
from  the  Imperial  Gazettes,  being  very  much  to  the  purpofe. 
"  Notwithftanding  thefe  people  are  fo  wretched,  that  they  have 
"  nothing  but  fags  to  cover  them,  which  do  not  at  all  fit,  and 
"  are  fcarce  fufficient  to  hide  their  nakednefs;  yet  they  betray 
"  their  foolifh  tafte  and  vain  oftentation,  whenever  they  have 
"  an   opportunity." 

la  Tranfdvania  fome  of  them  wear  the  AVallachian  drefs,  bus 
in  Hungary  they  are  fo  wedded  to  the  country  habit,  that  a  Gipfey 
had  rather  go  half  naked,  or  wrap  himfelf  up  in  a  lack,  than  he 
would  condefcend  to  wear  a  foreign  garb,  even  though  a  very  good 
one  were  given  to  him.  They  like  green  very  well,  but  fcarlct  li 
the  colour  which  they  prefer  to  all  others ;  for  which  reafon  a  man 
cannot  appear  abroad  in  a  red  habit,  though  worn  out,  withoutv 
being  furrounded  by  a  crowd  of  Gipfies,  old  and  young,  who  iri 
the  open  ftreet  want  to  purchafc  of  him,  be  it  coat,  pelliffe,  or 
breeches.  Unlefs  feverely  pinched  by  the  cold,  or  in  cafe  of  th^ 
greateft  neceffity,  they  will  not  deign  to  put  on  a  boors  coat : 
they,  rather  chufe  to  buy  for  their  own  ufe  caft  off  cloaths,  if  they, 

D.  z  happen 


(       20       ) 

■:Chap.  V.  happen  to  be  ornamented  with  lace  or  loops,  they  ftrut  about  in 
fuch  drefles,  as  proudly  as  if  they  were  not  only  lords  of  the 
diflrid,  but  of  the  whole  creation.  Thus  they  expend  all  the 
money  they  can  fpare,  in  fuch  fort  of  cloaths,  as  are  not  at  all 
becoming  their  ftation,  nor  anfvver  any  other  purpofe,  but  to 
betray  their  filly  notions,  and  expofe  them  to  the  world.  They 
do  not  pay  the  lead  regard  to  fymmetry,  nor  care  what  reafonable 
people  think  of  their  drefs ;  if  they  can  only  get  fomething  fhining 
to  put  on,  that  will  catch  the  eye,  they  give  themfelves  no  concern 
whether  the  reft  is  very  bad,  or  whether  they  have  it  not  at  all. 
It  is  no  uncommon  fpeftacle  to  fee  a  Gipfey,  parading  the  flreets, 
in  an  embroidered  pellifle,  or  laced  coat  trimmed  with  filver 
buttons,  barefooted,  without  an  hat,  and  a  dirty  ragged  fbirt,  or 
a  pair  of  embroidered  fcarlet  breeches,  and  perhaps  no  other 
covering  but  half  a  fliirt.  (9) 

Nothing  pleafes  an  Hungarian  Gipfey  fo  much,  as  a  pair  oT 
yellow  (tfchifchmcn)  boots  and  fpurs  :  no  fooner  do  thefe  glitter 
on  his  feet,  but  he  bridles  up,  and  marches  confequentially  about, 
often  eying  his  fine  boots,  but  never  minds  that  his  breeches  may 
have  loft  a  fore  or  a  hind  part,  or  be  in  fome  other  refpefts  quire 
:liabby.    (10) 

The  uiual  drefs  of  the  women  is  not  a  jot  better  than  the  men's, 
they  have  generally  been  thought  rather  to  go  beyond  them  ip. 
filth  and  n^ttinefs.  (11)    (12) 

Their  appearance   is  lliocking  to  any  civilized   perfon  :    their 

whole  covering   confifts  of,    either  a  piece  of  linen  thrown  over 

the  head  and  wound  round  the  thighs,  or  an  old  iliift  hung  over 

'.them,  through  which  their  Ihwaky  hides  appear  in  numberlefs 

places. 


(      21       ) 

places.  Sometimes,  in  winter,  the)'  wrap  ihemfelves  in  a  piece  of  Chap.  ▼. 
woollen  ftufF  like  a  cloak.  Occafionally  their  drefs  partakes  of 
the  other  fex,  as  they  (13)  wear  breeches  or  fome  other  male 
habiliment.  They  ufe  the  fame  covering  for  the  feet  as  the  men, 
cither  a  pair  of  coarfe  focks,  knit  with  wooden  needles,  which  is 
commonly  done  in  Moldavia  and  'Wallachia,  or  they  few  them  up 
In  rags,  which  remain  on  till  the  ftufF  perilhes  and  falls  off,  cr 
till  fpring  comes  on,  at  which  feafon,  both  men  and  women  go 
barefooted.  (14) 

They  are  as  fond  of  drefs  as  the  men,  and  equally  ridiculous  in 
it,  they  often  zcriir  a  drefs  cap,  while  their  rotten  linen  jacket, 
fcarce  covers  thofe  parts  which  nature  inftrufts  us  to  conceal,  or 
leave  their  fmoaked  breafts  open  to  view.  (15)  Tn  Spain  the\ 
hang  all  forts  of  trumpery  in  their  ears,  plaifter  their  temples  with 
great  patches  of  black  filk,  befides  a  number  of  baubles  about 
-t4ie  neck.    (16) 

The  Gipfies  take  very  little  trouble  about  their  childrens  drefs, 
thefe  run  about  naked  in  the  true  Calmuc  ftile,  till  ten  years  of 
.  age,  when  the  boys  get  breeches,  and  the  girls  aprons.  But  this 
nuifance  is  probably  at  an  end  now,  in  the  Imperial  dominions, 
both  in  Germany  and  Hungary,  an  order,  to  that  purpofe,  being 
IlTued  out  by__  the  great  Jofeph,  whole  piercing  eye,  nothing 
cfcapes. 

Before  I  difmifs  this  fubjeft,  I  muft  nionrion  a  laudable  cuftom 
among  the  Giplles,  in  order  to  ilivc  their  cloaths ;  when  they 
have  quarrelled,  and  mean  to  fight.  Before  they  proceed  ro 
aclion,  a  truce  takes  place  for  a  minute  or  two,  to  give  the 
combatants  time  to  llrip  to  their  fhirts,  that  their  cloaths  may  not 

fuffer 


Chap.  v.  fuffer  In  the  fray  :  then  the  ftorm  breaks  loofe,  and  each  lays  or 
the  other  as  hard  as  he  can.  (17)  It  has  this  ufe  in  it,  that 
whenever  any  body  appears  in  a  ragged  coat,  they  may  afErnv 
on  their  honour,  that  it  was  not  done  in  a;  Gipfey  brawl. 


CHAPTER       VI. 

On     their    family     aconomy. 


Ti 


HAT  thefe  people  are  ftill  the  unpoliflied  creatures  that 
Tude  nature  formed  them ;  or  at  moft,  have  only  advanced  one 
degree  towards  hurnanity,  is  evinced,  among  other  circumftances, 
by  their  family  ceconomy. 

Many  of  them  are  ftationary,  having  regular  habitations,  accords 
ing  to  their  fituation  in  life.  To  this  clafs  belong  thofe  who  keep 
public  houfes  in  Spain,  and  others  who  follow  fome  regular 
bufinei's  in  Tranfilvania  and  Hungary,  which  latter,  have  their 
own  miferable  hyts  near  Hermanftadt,  Cronftadt,  Biftritz,  Groff- 
waradein,  Debrezin,  Eperies,  Karchau,  and  other  places.  There 
are  alfo  many  flaves  to  particular  Bojars,  in  Moldavia  and  Walla- 
chia,,  who  do  not  wander  from  their  place  of  refidence  any  more 
than  the  others.  But  by  far  the  greateft  number  of  thefe  people, 
lead  a  very  different  kind  of  life  :  ignorant  of  the  comforts 
attending  a  fixed  place  to  live  at,  they  wander  from  one  diftridl  to 
another  in  hords,  having  no  habitations,  but  tents,  holes  in  the 
rocks,  or  caves;  the  former  fliade  them  in  fummer,  the  latter 
fcreen  them  in  winter.     Many  of  thefe  favage  people,  particularly 

in 


(     ^3     ) 

5a  Germany  and  Spain,  (i)  do  not  even  carry  tents  with  them.     Chap.  VT. 

but  fliekcr  thcmfelves,  from  the  heat  of  the  fun,  in  forefts,  fhaded 

by  the  rocks,  or  behind    hedges  :  they  are  very  partial  to  wiUows, 

under  which    they  ered  their  fleeping  place,  at  the  clofe  of  the 

evening.      Some  4ive    in    their   tents    (in   their    language   called 

(tfchater)  both  fummer  (2)  and  winter;  which  they  generally  prefer 

to  every  thing  elie.     In  Hungary,  even  thofe  who  have  given  up 

their  rambling  way  of  life,  and  built  houfes  for  themfelves,  feldom 

let  a  fpring   pafs,    without    taking  advantage  of  the  firft  fettled 

weather,  to  fet  up  a  tent  for  their  fummer  refidence ;  under  this 

each  one  enjoys  himfelf,  with  his  family,  nor  thinks  of  his  houfe, 

till  the  winter  returns,  and  the  froft  and  fnow  drive  him  back  to 

it   again.   (3) 

\Mien  he  can  get  it,  the  wandering  Gipfey,  in  Hungary  and 
Tranfilvania,  has  an  horfe  ;  (4)  in  Turkey,  an  afs  (5)  ferves  to 
carry  his  v\'ife,  a  couple  of  children,  with  his  tent.  When  he 
arrives  at  any  place  he  likes,  near  a  village  or  city,  he  unpacks, 
pitches  his  tent,  ties  his  animal  to  a  ftake  to  graze,  and  remains 
lome  weeks  there  :  or  if  he  does  not  find  his  ftation  convenient, 
he  breaks  up  in  a  day  or  two,  loads  his  beaft,  and  looks  out  for 
lome  more  agreeable  fituation,  near  fome  other  town.  Indeed,  he 
h^s  it  not  always  in  his  power  to  determine  how  long  he  fliall 
remain  in  the  fame  place;  for  the  boors  are  apt  to  call  upon  him,  on 
accovmt  of  fowls  and  geefe,  he  has  made  free  with.  It  fometimes 
happens,  when  he  is  very  much  at  his  eafe,  they  flilly  out  with 
bludgeons  or  hedge-flakes,  making  ufe  of  fuch  forcible  arguments, 
that  he  does  not  hefitate  a  moment,  to  fet  up  his  ftaff  a  little 
further  off.     Though,  in  general,  the  Gipfies  are  cunning  enough,  • 

when 


C    24    )^ 

Qhap.  VI.     when   they   have   purloined  any   thing,  or  done  oth"&r  mifchief," 
to   make   oft'    in    time,    before    the   villagers   begin    to    fufped 
them.    (6) 

For  their  winter  huts  they  dig  holes  in  the  ground,  ten  or  twelve 
feet  deep,  their  roof  is  made  of  rafters  laid  acrofs,  which  are 
covered  with  flraw  and  fods :  the  ftable,  for  the  beaft  which  carried 
the  tent  in  fummer,  is  a  fhed  built  at  the  entrance  of  the  hollow, 
and  clofed  up  with  dung  and  ftraw.  (7)  This  flied,  with  a  little  - 
opening,  rifing  above  the  roof,  to  let  out  the  fmoak,  are  the  only 
marks  by  which  a  traveller  can  diflinguifli  their  dwellings.  Both 
in  fummer  and  winter,  they  contrive  to  have  their  habitation  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  fome  village,  or  city.  (8)  Their  favorite 
method  of  building  Is  againft  an  hillock,  the  holes  in  the  level' 
ground  being  only  ufed  in  cafes  of  necefiity,  when  there  is  no 
riling  ground  near  the  fpot  they  have  pitched  upon  to  pafs  the 
winter  at.  An  Hungarian  writer  thus  defcribes  their  method  of 
conftrufting  the  fecond  fort  of  huts.  *'  They  dig  an  hollow, 
"  about  a  fathom  broad,  far  enough  into  the  hillock  to  bring 
"  their  floor  on  a  level  with  the  reft  of  the  plain,  in  order  to 
"  form  a  firm  upright  wall,  for  the  back  of  the  building.  Into 
•'  the  wall  they  fix  a  beam,  about  fix  feet  from,  and  parallel  to  the 
"  floor,  this  beam  reaches  as  far  as  the  intended  depth  of  the 
"  houfe,  feldom  exceeding  feven  or  eight  feet.  One  end  being 
"  faft  in  the  v.'all,  the  other  refhs  on,  and  is  fixed  to,  a  pillar 
*'  or  poft  driven  into  the  grotind.  When  that  is  done,  they  lay 
"  boards,  balks,  or  fiich  other  wood  as  they  can  find,  againft  it 
"  on  each  fide,  in  form  of  a  pointed  roof,  which  viewed  from  a 
"  diftance,  exhibits  a  front  in  the  fhape  of  an  equilateral  trianglq. 

"  The 


*'  Tile  operalion  is  concluded  by  covering  the  whole  "building     Chap.  VL 

"  with  ftraw,  fods,  and  earth,    to  fecure    its    inhabitants,    from 

■"  the  rain,  fnow  and  cold.     They  always  contrive,   when  they 

"  can,  to  place  their  edifice  fo  as  to  front  either  the  rifmg  or 

"  mid  day  fun ;  this  being  the  fide  where  the  opening  is  left, 

"  for  a  door  to  go  in  and  out  at,  which  is  clofed  at  night,   either 

"  with  a  coarfe  woollen  cloth,  or  a  few  boards."  (9) 

One  may  eafily  imagine,  how  difmal  and  horrid,  the  infide  of  fuch 
Gipfey  huts  muft  be.  Air  and  daylight  excluded,  full  of  damp,  ftink 
and  filth,  ihey  have  more  the  appearance  of  wild  beafts  dens,  than 
•the  habitations  of  intelligent  beings.  Rooms  and  feparate  apart- 
ments are  not  even  thought  of;  all  is  one  open  fpace,  in  the 
middle  whereof  is  the  fii-e,  ferving  both  for  the  purpofe  of  cooking, 
and  warming  them ;  the  father  and  mother  lye  half  naked,  the 
children  entirely  fo,  round  it.  Chairs,  tables,  beds  or  bedfteads, 
find  no  place  here,  they  frt,  eat,  ileep,  and  do  eixry  thing  on  th^, 
Ijare  ground,  or  at  moft,  (jjread  an  old  blanket,  or  in  the  Banat, 
a  fheep  fkin  under  them.  When  they  have  a  fine  day,  the  dooi" 
is  fet  open  for  the  fun  to  Ihine  in.  Which  they  continue  watching, 
fo  long  as  it  is  above  the  horizon ;  when  the  day  clofes,  they  Ihut 
their  door,  confign  chemfelves  over  to  reft,  and  ileep  till  the 
its  return.  When  the  weather  is  cold,  or  tlte  fnow  prevents 
their  opening  the  door,  they  make  up  the  fire,  fit  round  it  till 
they  fall  alleep,  without  any  more  light  than  it  affords.   (10) 

The  furniture  and  property  of  the  Gipfies  have  been  already 
defcribed  ;  they  confift  of  an  earthen  pot,  an  iron  pan,  a  fpoon,  a 
jug  and  a  knife;  when  it  i'o  happens,  that  every  thing  is  complear, 
they   fometimes   add  a   difli :    thefe  ferve  for  the  whole  family. 

E  When 


(      26      )■ 

Chap.  VI.  When  the  mafter  of  the  hoiife  is  a  Imith  by  trade,  as  will  be 
mentioned  by  and  bye,  he  has  a  pair  of  bellows  to  blow  up  his 
fire,  a  fmall  ftone  anvil,  a  pair  of  tongs,  perhaps  a  couple  of 
hammers,  add  to  thefe  a  few -old  tatters,  in  which,  as  before 
mentioned,  he  dreffes  himfelf,  his  knapfack,  fome  pieces  of  torn 
bed  deaths,  his  tent,  with  his  antiq\iated  jade,  and  yovi  have  a 
compleat  catalogue  of  a  nomadic  Gipfey's  eftate. 

There  is  very  little  to  be  faid  concerning  the  domeftic  employ- 
ment of  the  women,  the  care  of  their  children  is  little,  indeed 
hardly  any  at  all.  They  neither  wafli,  mend  their  cloaths,  nor 
cjean  their  utenfils,  they  feldom  bake,  the  whole  of  their  bufinefs 
then,  is  reduced  to  thefe  few  articles  :  dreffing  their  food  and 
eating  it,  fmoaking  tobacco,  prating,  aiul  fleeping.  They  con- 
tinue the  whole  winter  in  their  hut,  but  at  the  firft  croaking  of 
the  frogs,  they  pull  down  their  houfe  and  march  off.    (ii) 

Such  is  the  condition  of  the  Giplies  who  wander  about  in 
Hungary,  Turkey,  and  other  countries,  being  no  where,  or  rather 
every  where,  at  home.  The  remainder  of  thefe  people,  who  have 
reconciled  themfelves  to  a  fettled  way  of  life,  are  in  much  better 
circumftances,  and  vaftly  more  rational,  than  thofe  I  have  jufl 
defcribed.  It  might  be  reafonably  expefted,  that  thofe  Spanifli 
Giplies,  who  are  innkeepers,  and  entertain  ftrangers,  ihould  be 
more  civilifed,  but  it  alfo  holds  good,  with  regard  to  thofe  in 
Hungary  and  Tranfilvania,  who  have  different  ways  of  gaining 
a  livelihood.  Their  habitations  are  conveniently  divided  into 
chambers,  are  likewife  furniflied  with  tables,  benches,  decent  kitchen 
furniture,  and  other  necefTaries.  The  few  who  farm  or  breed  cattle, 
have  a  plough  and  other  implements  of  hufbandry,  the  others  in 

a  certain 


c  ^7  y 

a  certain  degree  what  is  ^vanted  for  carrying  on  their  trade;  though  Chap.  VI. 
even  here  you  arc  not  to  expeft  fuperfluity.  Their  habitations, 
cloaths,  as  well  as  every  thing  elfe  belonging  to  them,  indicate,  ' 
that  even  thefe  belong  to  the  clafs  of  poor.  They  are  very  fond 
of  gold  and  lilver  plate,  particularly  filver  cups,  which  is  a  difpo- 
fition  they  have  in  common  with  the  wandering  Gipfies.  They 
let  flip  no  opportunity  of  acquiring  fomething  of  the  kind,  they 
will  even  ftarve  themfclves  to  procure  them.  Though  they  feem 
little  anxious  to  heap  up  riches  for  their  children,  yet  thefe  fre- 
quently inherit  a  trcafure  of  this  fort,  and  are  obliged  in  their  turn 
to  preferve  it  as  a  facred  inheritance.  The  ordinary  travelling 
Gipfies,  who  are  in  pofledion  of  fuch  a  piece  of  plate,  commonly 
bury  it  under  the  hearth,  of  their  dwelling,  in  order  to  prevent  ■  ' 
its  being  made  away  with.  (12)  This  inclination  to  deprive  ones 
felf  of  necelfaries,  that  wc  may  poffefs  a  fuperfluity,  as  well  as 
many  other  of  their  cuftoms,  is  curious  :  yet  appears  to  be  ancient., 
and  it  was  probably  inherent  in  them  when  they  were  firft  feen  bv 
-Europeans.   (13) 

CHAPTER      VIT. 

Tbeir   occupations    and   trades. 

X  come  now  to  the  means,  the  Gipfies  make  ufe  of,  to  maintain 
themfelves.  Here  we  lb  all  difcover  the  reafon,  why  poverty  and 
want  are,  fo  generally,  their  lot :  it  is  owing  to  their  lazinefs,  and 
being  fo  fond  of  their  eafc.  If  you  want  to  find  people,  who 
earn  their  bread  by  the  i\\cat  of  their  brow,  jow  muft  certainly 

E  2  not 


(     28-     ) 

Ch^>p.  VII.  not  feek  them  among  the  Gipfey  tribe.  They  abhor  all  kinds  op 
work,  which  are  either  laborious  or  require  application ;  and  had ' 
rather  fuffer  hunger  and  nakednefs,  than  exert  themfelves  to- 
procure  food  and  raiment,  on  fuch  hard  terms.  They  therefore- 
.  either  chufe  fome  trade,  which  is  eafily  carried  on,  allowing  them 
many  idle  hours,  or  addid  themfelves. to  unlawful  courfes,  as  anyi 
body  may  eafily  be  convinced. 

Black  and  white  fmiths,  are  the  moft  ufual   trades  among  the 
Gipfies ;   in  Spain  very  few  follow  any  regular  bufmefs,  but  among  ■ 
thefe  few,    fome  are  fmiths;  (i)    on  the  contrary,    in  Hungary 
this>  trade  is  fo  common  among  them,  that  it  is  a  proverb,  fo- 
many,Gipfies,  fo  many  fmiths ;  (2)  the  famei  might  be  faid  of  thofe 
in  Tranfilvania,  Wallachia,  Moldavia,  and  all  Turkey  in  Europe;, 
at  leaft  fuch  workers  in  fire  are  very  numerous  (3)  in  all  thofe. 
countries.     This  occupation  feenis  to   have  been  a  favorite  one 
among  them   from  the  moft  diftant   periods,  as  appears  not  only 
by  Bejlonius's  (4)  account,  but  by  an  older  record,  of  an  Hun- 
garian king  Uladiflaus,  in  the  year  1496,  mentioned  by  the  Abbe. 
Pray,    in    his    Annals,    and    Friedwaldfky,     in   his   Mineralogy, 
wherein  it  is  ordered,  that  every,  officer  and  fubjeSl,  of  whatever  rank 
or  condition,  do  allozv  to  Thomas  Polgar,  leader  of  tzventy  five  tents  of 
wandering  Gipfies,  free  refidence  every  where,  and  on  no  account   to 
jnolefl  either  him  or  his  people ;  becaufe  they  had  prepared  mufket  bullets, 
and  other  military  flores,  for  the  Bifhop  Sigifmund,  at  Fiinfkirchen.  (5) 
Another   inftance   occurred  in  the   year    1565,  v^hen    Muftapha, 
Turkifli    regent   of  Bofnia,    befieged  Crupa,  the    Turks   having 
expended  their  powder  and  cannon  balls,  Gipfies  were  employed  ; 
to  make  balls,  part  of  irpn,  the  refl  of  ftone  cafed  with  lead..  (6) 

The 


(     ^-9     ) 

The  Gipfies  of  our  time,  do  not  like  to  undertake  Heavy  work,     Chap.  Vli/ 
I    do    not    find    the)'    go    beyond    a   pair    of   light    horfe-flioes  : 
in  general  they  confine  themfelves  to  fmall  articles,  fuch  as  rings, 
Jews-harps,  fmall  nails,  mend  old  pots  and  kettles,  make  knives, 
feals,  needles,  and  fometimes  work  trifles  in  tin  or  brafs.  (7) 

Their  materials,  tools,  apparatus,   all  are  bad,  and  of  the  moft' 
inferior  kind.     Their  common  way  is,  to  colled;  fmall  pieces  of 
rufty  iron,  old  nails,  broken  horfe  (hoes,  and  fuch  kind  of  rubbifh, 
which  they  fufe  and  fhape  to  their  purpofe.  (8)     The  anvil  is  a 
ftone,  the  other  implements  are,  a  pair  of  hand  bell6ws,  a  pair  of 
pincers,  a  hammer,  a  vife,  and  a  file  :  (9)  thefe  are  the  materials, 
a  nomadic   Gipfey,  carries  with  him,  from  place  to  place.   (10) 
AVhenever  he  has  a  mind  to  work,  he  is  at  no  lofs  for  fliel ;   on 
his  arrival  at  a  ftation,  where  he  means  to  remain  a  few   days  or 
weeks,  he   takes  his  beaft,  loads  him  with  wood,  builds  a  fmall ' 
Iciln,-  and  manufa(fb.ires  his  own   coals.   (11)      In  good  weather, 
the  work  is  carried  on  out   of  doors  ;   when  it   is  ftormy,  or  the 
fun  too  powerful,  he  retires  under  his  tent.     He  does  not  fland, 
but   fits  down  on  the   ground,   crofs  legged  to  his  work;  which 
pofition  is  rendered  neceffary,  not  only  by  cuftom,   but  the  quality 
of  his  tools.     The-  wife  fits  by  to  work  the  bellows,   In  which  ■ 
operation,  flie  is  fometimes  relieved  by  the  elder  children ;  (12) 
the  little  ones  fit  naked  as  they  were  born,  round  the  fire.     They 
are  generally  praifed,  for   their  dexterity  and  quicknefs,  notwith- 
fbanding  the   wretched    tools   they   have   to   operate    (13)    with. 
When  any  piece  of  work   requires  much  time  to  finifh,  they  are  • 
apt   to  lofe  their  patience,  and,   in  that   cafe,   become  indifferent :. - 
vAether  it  be  v,«ll  executed  or  not.     They  never  think  of  labour. 


(     30    -) 

Chap.  yil.  as  long  as  they  have  got  a  dry  cruft,  o;  any  thuig  elfe  to  iatisfy 
their  hunger.  (14)  They  frequently  have  orders  for  different 
articles,  but  if  not,  as  foon  as  a  few  nails,  or  fome  other  trifles 
are  manufaftured,  man,  woman,  and  children  diflodge,to  carry  their 
merchandife,  from  houfe  to  houfe,  for  fale,  in  the  neighbouring 
villages  :  their  traffick  is  carried  on  fometimes  for  ready  money, 
•tometimes  by  barter  for  eatables  or  other  necefTaries.  (15) 

Another  branch  of  commerce  much  followed  by  the  Gipfies  is 
horfe  dealing,  (16)  In  thofe  parts  of  Hungary  where  the  climate 
is  lb  mild,  that  horfcs  may  lie  out  all  the  year,  the  Gipfies  avail 
themfelves  of  this  circumftance  to  breed,  as  well  as  deal  in  horfes : 
by  which  they,  fomethimes,  not  only  procure  a  competency,  but 
grow  rich.  (17,)  This  laft  fort  are  not  very  numerous,  for  the 
greateft  number  of  them  only  deal  in  blind  worn  out  jades,  which 
they  drive  about  to  different  markets,  to  fell  or  barter.  When 
not  fortunate  enough  to  find  a  chap  for  them,  they  lead  them  to 
the  collar  maker,  who  values  the  hide,  and  takes  him  off"  their  (18) 
hands  for  a  few  grofchens.  In  order  to  avoid  being  reduced  to 
this  neceflity,  they  often  praftice  the  flyeft  tricks  to  conceal  the 
animal's  defefts.  In  Spain  therefore,  Gitano  and  Gitaneria  (Gipfey 
and  Gipfeyifm)  are  grown  into  common  expreffions,  to  imply  a 
cheater  in  hotfes  (19)  with  the  tricks  he  makes  ufe  of.  In  the 
year  1727,  they  became  fo  notorious  in  Sweden,  that  it  was  taken 
into  confideration  at  the  diet,  and  their  total  expulfion  voted  to  be 
a  neceffary  (20)  meafure.  The  following  trick  is  frequently  played 
in  Hungary,  and  the  adjacent  country,  to  make  an  horfe  appear  brifk 
and  aftive.  The  rider  alights,  at  a  fmall  diftance  from  the  place  where 
he  means  to  offer  his  horfe  for  fale,  and  belabors  the  poor  bcaft, 

till 


(     31     > 

till  he  has  put  the  whole  mufcular  fj'ftem  th  motion  with  fright,     Chap.  VIL 
he  then  mounts  again  and  proceeds.     The  poor  beaft,  recollefting 
the  blows  he  has  received,  jumps  about,  or  fets  out  full  fpeed,  at 
the  leaft  fignal ;  the  buyer,  entirely  ignorant  of  the  preparatory 
difcipline  he  has  undergone,  looks  upon  this  as  natural  vivacity, 
and  in  hopes  that  good  feeding  with  care,  will  render  him  ftill 
more  lively,  ftrikes  a  bargain ;  but  the  next  day  he  has  the  morti- 
fication to  difcover,  that  he  has  bought  a  jade,  on  which  all  his 
care  will  be  thrown  away,  as  the  beaft  has  not  a  leg  to  ftand  (21) 
upon.     In  Swabia  and  on  the  Rhine,  they  have  another  device ; 
they  make  an  incilion  in  fome  fecret  part  of  the  fkin,  through 
which  they  blow  the  creature  up,   till   he  looks  fleihy  and  plump, 
they  then  apply  a  ftrong  flicking  plaifter,  to  prevent  the  air  from 
coming  out  again.     If  what  Wolfgang  Franz  aflures  us,  be  true, 
they  fometimes  make  ufe  of  another  device  with  a  live  eel,  to  this 
blown  up  horfe,  that  he  may  not  only  appear  in  good  condition, 
but  fpirited  and  lively.  (22)     One  would  imagine,  that  on  accouitt 
of  thele,    and  fuch  like  pieces  of  roguery,  nobody  wovild  ever 
venture  to  deal  with  a  Gipfey  for  an  horfe,  was  not  the  poffibility  .     . 

of  it  proved  by  the  faft  itfelf.  But  we  fee  inftances  of  this  infa- 
tuation in  other  tranfaclions  :  it  is  well  known  that  every  Jew  will 
cheat,  whenever  he  has  an  opportunity,  yet  thefe  people  have  lived 
by  trade,  ever  fince  their  difperfion  from  Babel.  Then  thefe 
frauds  do  not  conftantly  happen,  the  Gipfies  too  always  fell  their 
horfes  cheap,  and  poor  people  cannot  afford  to  pay  dear  for  them, 
which  is  the  reafon  that  the  Gipfies  can  continue  their  traffick 
in  horfes.  . 

.  Ta:., 


(     3"     ) 

Chap.  VII         To   the    above  two  trades,    commonly  followed  by   the  men, 
may      be    added,     that    fome     are    carpenters    or    turners  ;    the 
former     make    waterin^g    troughs     and    chefts,    the     latter    turn 
trenchers,    difhes,  make  fpoons   and  other   houfehold    furniture, 
which  they  hawk  about.     Others  make  fieves,  or  maintain   them- 
felves  by  cobling  fhoes.     Many  of  thefe,  as  well  as  the  blackfmiths 
and  whitefmiths,  find   conftant  employment   in  the  houfes-of  the 
better  fort  of  people,  for  whom  they  work  the  year  round.     They 
are  not   paid   in    money ;    but,    befides  other  advantages,    find   a 
certain  fubfiftence.     Thofe  who  are  not  thus  provided  for,  do  not 
wait   at    home,    for   cuftomers,    but    throw  their    implements   in 
a  fack,    over  their   fhoulders,    feeking  bufmefs   in    the    cities    or 
villages :    When   any    one    calls,    they   throw  down    the  bundle, 
and  prepare  the  apparatus  for   work,    before    the  door   of  their 
employer.    (23.) 

The  Gipfies  have  a  fixed  averfion  to  agriculture,  and  had  rather 
fuffer  hunger  or  want,  than  follow  the   plough,  to  earn  a  decent 
livelyhood,    from   the  grateful  earth.  (24)     But  as  there   is  no 
general   rule  without  an  exception,  fo,  befides  the  flaves  to   the 
Bojars,  in  Moldavia  and  Wallachia,  who  are  conftrained  to  apply 
to  it,  (25)  there  are  fome  in  Hungary,  who  do  it  of  their  own 
accord.     Since  the  year    1768,    the  Emprefs  Therefa,  has  com- 
manded, that  the  Hungarian  and  Tranfilvanian  Gipfies  fliould  be 
inftrufted   in  hufbandry,   but   thefe  orders  have  been  very   little 
attended  to.     At  this  time  there  are  fo  few  of  them  farmers,  in  this 
country,   that  they   are  not  worth  mentioning,  (26)  though   in 
Spain,  (27)  and  other  European  countries,    they  are  ftill  more 

fcarce. 


(     33     ) 

fnsrce,  as  it  would  be  difficult  to  find  one  who  had  ever  made  a     Chap.  VII. 
furrow  in  his  life. 

It  was  formerly  very  common  in  Hungary,  and  in  Tranlilvania, 
almoft  univerfally  the  cufhom,  to  employ  the  Gipfies  for  hangmen 
and  executioners.  They  ftill  perform  tljc  bulinefs  of  flayers  in 
Hungary,  and  of  executioners  in  different  parts  of  (28)  Tranlil- 
vania. Their  afliduity  in  torturing,  their  cruel  invention  in  tor- 
menting, are  defcribed  by  Toppeltin  to  be  fo  fliocking,  as  plainly 
proves  no  people  fo  well  calculated  for  works  of  barbarity  as  the 
Gipfies.  (29)  Flaying  is  not  their  regular  profeffion  in  any  place, 
but  merely  a  cafual  occupation,  which  they  follow,  over  and  above 
their  fmiths  or  other  work.  Whenever  a  beafl  dies,  near  where 
they  chance  to  be,  it  is  a  fortunate  circumflance,  if  there  happens 
to  be  no  fkinner  in  the  place ;  not  becaufe  they  can  make  much 
of  the  {km,  which  they  always  leave  with  the  owner  for  a  trifling 
conlidcration,  but  they  are  fure  thereby  to  procure  a  plentiful 
provifion  of  flefli  for  the  family.  (30) 

Such  are  the  mens  employments.  I  Ihall  now  proceed  to  the 
women,  and  fliew  their  particular  methods  of  getting  their  bread. 
It  was  formerly,  and  ftill  is  the  cuftom,  among  the  wandering 
Gipfies,  efpecially  in  winter,  that  the  man  does  not  maintain  the 
wife,  but  the  wife  the  hufliand.  (3 1 )  Where  this  is  not  quite  the 
cafe,  as  in  iurrHner,  when  the  men  have  the  before  recited  occupa- 
tions, or  among  thofe,  who  have  a  regular  fettlement,  yet  the 
women  always  endeavour  to  contribute  their  (hare  towards  the 
maintenance  of  the  family  :  fome  deal  in  old  cloaths,  others  fre- 
quent brothels,  or  let  their  perlbns  out,  in  fome  other  way,  for 
h^re.     This  is  common  in  Spain,  (32)  ftill  more  lb  in  Conftan- 

F  tinople. 


c  34  y 

(^hap.  VII.  tinopie,  (33)  and  all  over  Turkey:  (34)  probably  becaufe,  in 
other  places,  nobody  likes  to  be  connefted  with  fuch  uncleanly 
beings.  There  are  others  in  Conftantinople,  who  make  and  fell 
brooms,  and  this  trade  is  followed  by  thofe,  chiefly,  who  are 
too  old  to  get  a  livelihood  by  their  debauchery.  Dancing  is 
another  means  they  have  of  getting  fomething,  they  generally 
pradlice  this  when,  begging,  particularly  from  men  in  the  ftreets, 
or  calling  in  at  houfes  afking  charity.  Their  dances  are  the  moft 
difgufting  that  can  be  conceived,  always  ending  with  fulfome 
grimaces,  or  the  moft  lafcivious  attitudes  and  geftures,  uncovering 
thofe  parts,  which  the  rudeft  and  moft  uncultivated  people  carefully 
conceal ;  nor  is  this  indecency  confined  to  the  married  women 
only,  but  is  rather  more  praftifed  by  yovmg  girls,  travelling  with 
their  fathers,  who  are  alfo  muficians,  and  for  a  trifling  acknow- 
ledgement, exhibit  their  dexterity  to  any  body,  who  is  pleafed 
with  thefe  unfeemly  dances.  They  are  trained  up  to  this  impu- 
dence, from  their  earlieft  years,  never  fuffering  a  paffenger  to  pafs 
their  parents  hut,  without  trying  to  get  fomething,  by  frilking 
about  naked  before  him.  (35) 

I  fhall  not  fay  any  thing  concerning  fortunetelling,  with  which 
they  impofe  on  people's  credulity,  in  every  diftrift  and  corner 
of  Europe  ;  this  being  a  thing  univerfally  known.  Yet  it  is 
extraordinary,  that  women,  generally  too  not  till  they  become  old 
hags,  fhould  be  fo  fliarpfighted,  as  to  difcover,  in  every  perfon's 
hand,  the  dark  myflery  of  futurity.  A  few  inftances  there  are  of 
men  being  thus  gifted,  but  they  are  fo  few,  that  they^re  only 
exceptions  to  a  general  rule.  It  is  therefore  owing  to  the  Gipfey 
women  alone,  that  faith  in  divination  ftill  remains,   in  the  minds . 

of 


(    35     ) 

•of  millions  of  people.  It;  is  true,  Europe  is  not  originally  beholden  Chap.  VIL 
to  the  Gipfies  for  it,  it  being  deep  rooted  in  the  iliipidity  of  the 
middle  age,  (36)  when  they  arrived  and  brought  it  with  them  alfo. 
This  fcience  was  already  brought  to  a  greater  degree  of  perfedtion 
than  among  them,  rules  were  invented  to  tell  lies  from  the 
infpeclion  of  the  hand,  whereas  thefe  poor  wretches  were  efteemed 
mere  bunglers.  During  the  lad,  and  beginning  of  this  century 
they  were  looked  upon  as  only  a  fupernumerary  party  ;  as  there 
were  men  of  great  learning,  who  not  only  read  leftures  in  college, 
on  the  divine  art  of  chiromancy,  but  wrote  many  books,  vilifying; 
the  Gipfies,  and  endeavouring  to  fpoil  their  market  (3  7)  by  expoling 
their  ignorance.  But  thefe  enlightened  men  are  no  more,  their 
knowledge  is  depofited  in  the  dead  archives  of  literature;  and 
probably,  if  there  were  no  Gipfies,  with  them  would  alfo  have 
died  the  belief  in  chiromancy,  in  the  fame  manner  as,  in  aftrology, 
necromanc}',  oneirocritica,  and  the  other  offsprings  of  fancy. 
By  thefe  alone,  will  this  deceit  be  kept  alive,  till  every  Gipfey  is  ' 
conftrained  to  acknowledge  fome  country,  and  to  have  fome 
oftenfible  mode  of  gaining  a  livelihood.  We  can  only  pity  the 
poor  deluded  -wTetches,  who  pay  their  grofchen  or  kreutzer, 
for  a  few  unmeaning  words ;  as  if  it  were  pofTible,  for  people  to 
inftrucl  us,  concerning  our  future  fortune  in  life,  v,ho  are  ignorant 
■of  their  own ;  being  unable  to  determine  whether  a  day  or  two 
hence,  they  may  ftill  be  telling  fortunes,  or  taken  up  by  the  magif- 
^:rates,  and  hanged  for  theft. 

I  muft  add  to  the  chiromantic  deception  of  the  Gipfey  women, 
that  they  alfo,  but  not  exclufive  of  the  men,  cure  bewitched  cattle, 
difcover  thefts,  and  poflefs  noftrums  of  various  kinds,  to  which 

F  2  they 


(     3^     ) 

Chap.  VI^.  they  afcribe  great  virtues.  Thek  noftrums  confift  prhicipally  of 
roots,  and  amulets  made  of  unfermented  dough,  marked  with 
ftrange  figures,  and  dried  in  the  air.  Grifelini  fays  that,  in  the 
Biinat  of  Temefwar,  they  fell  certain  fmall  ftones,  chiefly  a  kind 
of  fcoriiE,  which  they  fay  poflefs  the  quality,  to  render  the  wearer 
fortunate  in  love,  play,  (38)  and  other  things.  Were  that  true, 
they  are  the  neareft,  why  deliver  to  another,  what  they  have  fq 
much  occafion  for  themfelves  ?  Why  do  they  beg  and  fteal, 
when,,  with  the  afliflance  of  thefe  ftones,  they  might  honorably 
acquire  riches,  and  good  fortune  ?  Yet  thefe  ftones  are  purchafed 
not  only  in  the  Banat,  but  in  Germany.  People  ufe  their  quack 
medicines,  call  the  Gipfey  woman  into  the  ftable,  to  exorcife  their 
bewitched  cattle,  without  fufpefting  any  trick,  although  the  whole 
is  founded  on  deceit.  So  the  open-hearfed  farmer,  in  Suabia  and 
Bavaria,  has  recourfe  to  the  Gipfies  on  many  occafions,  making  ufe. 
of  them  as  doctors,  for  man  and  beaft  :  and  conftantly  in  cafes  of 
enchantment,  flies  to  the  Gipfey ;  this  circumftance  happens 
ofteneft  among  thofe  of  the  common  people,  who  rail  moft  againft, 
witches  and  witchcraft.  Whenever  a  cow  does  not  feed  kindly,, 
fomething  is  immediately  fufpefted,  and  the  Gipfey  woman  is 
called,  who  is  often  fo  fuccefsful  as  to  remove  the  complaint. 
She  goes  into  the  flable,  orders  the  cow  to  be  ftiewii  to  her, 
remains  a  few  minutes  alone  with  it,  after  every  one.  olfe  is  gone  out ; 
having  tinilhed  her  operations,  fhe  calls  in  the  mafter,  acquaints 
him  with  the  beaft's  recovery,  and  behold  it  eats  heartily.  How, 
happens  this  ?  Was  it  not  a  piece  of  enchantment,  v/herein  the 
Gipfey  really  afted  the  magician  ?  Certainly  not.  The  fraud  is. 
this.     When  the   cattle   are  feeding   abroad,  the  Gipfey  woman., 

takes 


(     37     ) 

takes  advantage  of  the  keeper's  abfencc  to  entice  fome  of  them.     Chap,  VII. 

with  a  handful  of  fodder  to  follow  her,  than  fmears  them,    over 

tJie  nofc  and  mouth,  with  fome  naftinefs,  flie  has  ready  in  the  other  s 

liand.     From  that  moment  the  creature  loaths  all  kinds  of  food  or 

drink,  as  every  thing  fmells  of  the  naftinefs.     V/hen  Ilie  is  called 

in  to  apply  a  remedy,  the  whole  Ikill  required,   is  to  wipe  oft"  the 

fluff,  (lie  had  put  on,  a  day  or  two  before  :     by  this  means  the 

true  fmell  is  reftored,   and  the  cow  being  hungry,    it  is  no  wonder 

ihe  fliouki  fall  to  greedily.     From  this  fmgle  inftance,  a  judgemenc. 

may  be  formed  of  other  cafes. 

The  common  Gipfey  occupations,  wherein  men,  and  women 
take  an  equal  fhare,  are,  in  Spain,  keeping  inns;  (39)  princi-- 
pally  mulic  in  Hungary  and  (40)  Turkey ;  and  gold-wafhing  in 
Tranfilvania,  the  Banat,  Moldavia  and  Wallachia.  They  ufed, 
formerly,  to  be  concerned  in  (41)  fmuggling,  and  probably  ftill 
are,  although  it  is  not  mentioned  by  any  later  writers. 

Both  men  and  women  Gipfies,  attend  at  entertainments,  with 
their  mufic,  and  fliew  great  proficiency  in  the  art;  befides  fome 
wind  inftrument,  they  have  generally  a  violin  :  many  have  attained 
to.fo  great  a  perfection  on  that  inftrument,  as  to  be  employed  in 
the  chapels  of  the  nobility,  and  admired  as  great  matters.  Barna 
Mihah',  was  an  Orpheus  of  thb  kind,  in  the  country  of  Zips, 
who  diftingulflied  himfelf,  about  the  middle  of  the  prefent  century, 
in  the  chapel  of  the  Cardinal,  Count  Einerick  von  Cfchaky,  The 
Cardinal,  who  was  a  judge  of  mufic  himfelf,  had  fo  great  a  value 
for  him,  that  he  rendered  his  likenefs  immortal,  (42)  by  one  of 
the  moft  capital  painters.  Such  inftances  are  not  wanting  in  the 
other  fex;  it  is  well  known  that  a  Gipfey  girl^  was  fo  famous,  as.. 

a  fidler> 


'Kl^l 


(     38     ) 

■Chap.  VII-  -a  iidler,  at  fourteen  years  of  age,  that  the  richefl  and  moft  faniion- 
able  people  in  Hungary,  ufed  to  fend  twenty  or  thirty  miles,  for 
her,  to  play  at  their  balls.  There  are  likewife  many  fcrapers,  to 
whom  Zeiller's  words  are  applicable,  "  that  their  mufic  has  a 
"  difmal  found."  (43)  But  thefe  are  generally  fuch  as  have 
learned  of  other  fcrapers,  at  their  own  expence.  This  kind  travel 
aboiit,  with  the  daiicers  abovcmentioned,  or  play  to  the  peafants, 
who,  not  having  much  tafte,  always  make  them  welcome  at  their 
weddings,  or  dances.  They  fcratch  away  on  an  old  patched 
violin,  or  rumble  on  a  broken  bafs,  neither  caring  about  better 
inftruments,  nor  minding  to  ftop  in  tune,  being  what  they  are, 
more  for  want  of  application,  than  capacity.  (44)  Others  praftife 
vocal  mufic,  (45)  and  make  their  fortunes,  particularly  in  Spain, 
"by  finging.  (46) 
,  Goldwalhing,  in  the  rivers,  is  another  occupation,  by  whicli 
many  thoufand  Gipfies,  of  both  fexes,  procure  a  livelihood,  in 
the  Banat,  Tranfilvania,  Wallachia  and  Moldavia.  As  this  is 
■only  a  fummer  employment,  they  are  under  the  neceffity  of  finding 
fome  other  method  of  maintaining  themfelves,  during  the  winter. 
It  is  not  permitted  for  every  one  without  exception,  to  be  a  gold- 
walher  :  in  Tranfilvania,  fuch  only  can  do  it,  who  have  leave  from 
the  office  of  Mons ;  and  thefe  only  enjoy  the  privilege  under 
•certain  reftriftions.  (47)  It  is  the  fame  in  Wallachia  and  Mol- 
davia, where  none  of  the  Bojar's  flaves,  thence  called  Bojarefk 
(Bojar  Gipfies)  are  allowed  to  meddle  with  goldwafliing,  that 
being  a  liberty  granted,  only  to  thofe  who,  like  other  fubjefts, 
are  immediately  vmder  the  prince,  thence  called  Domnefk  (princely 
Gipfies)  which  are  alfo    fubdivided    into  three  claflcs;    the  firft 

named 


C     39     ) 

< 

named  Radar;  the  fecond  Urfir;.  and  the  iKird  Lajafchen,  The  Chap.  VII. 
Rudars  alone  have  the  licence  abovementioned  ;  the  two  laft  are 
obliged  to  get  their  livelihood  (48)  in  fome  other  way.  Each 
perfon  is  forced  to  pay  a  certain  tribute  to  government.  The 
goldwafhers  in  Tranfilvania  and  the  Banat,  pay  four  guilders 
annually,  which  is  difcharged  in  gold  duft  :  the  fame  fum  is  due 
from  every  Gipfey,  though  many  evade  it.  Thev  contrive  to 
keep  out  of  the  way,  when  the  time  for  payment  comes  on,  parti- 
cularly the  Hungarian  Gipfies.  (49)  The  tribute  in  Wallachia 
and  Moldavia,  does  not  go  into  the  public  treafury,  but  belongs  to  ■ 
the  Princeffes  for  pin  money.  In  Cantemir's  time,  thofe  in  Moldavia, 
produced  yearly  one  thoufand  fix  hundred  drams;  ( 5o)and  the  Confort 
of  the  Wallachian  Hofpodar,  Stephen  Rakowitza,  in  the  year  1764 
received  from  her  Rudars,  two  hundred  and  forty  in  number, 
twelve  hundred  and  fifty  four  drams,  a  fum,  according  to  General 
von  Bauer  and  Sulzer,  amounting  to  one  thoufand  and  three  drams, 
fine  gold.  What  the  Gipfies,  in  Wallachia  and  Moldavia,  get 
over  and  above  their  head  money,  goes  to  the  grand  Aimafch,  at 
two  lion  gilders  the  dram ;  this  he  afterwards  fells  again,  at  a 
higher  price,  according  to  its  real  (51)  value;  as  General  von 
Bauer  believes,  for  his  own  profit,  not  for  that  of  the  -prince. 
The  goldwafhers  in  the  Banat  and  Tranfilvania,  difpofe  of  theirs 
at  the  royal  redemption  office,  (52)  in  Zalatnya.  The  earnings 
of  thefe  people  is  various,  according  to  time  and  place  :  during 
heavy  rains  and  floods  are  the  moft  favorable  feafons ;  befides  that 
their  profit  is  more  or  Icfs,  according  to  the  quality  of  the  river- 
they  wafh  in ;  at  the  moft  profitable  times,  viz.  at  the  floods, 
Grifelini  (53;  calctilates.  their  daily  gain  to  be  about  three  gro~ 

fchens 


(     40     ) 

Oiftp.  VIl.  fchens  at  the  highfft.  If  we  underftand,  as  we  ought  to  do,  that 
this  is  not  earned  by  each  perfon,  but  by  a  whole  family,  it  will 
agree,  pretty  nearly,  with  Mr.  Dembfcher  (54)  account  :  he  fays, 
"  In  the  year  1770,  there  were  in  the  diftriifls  of  Uj-Palanka, 
"  Orfova,  and  Caranfebes,  upwards  of  eighty  goldwafhers,  all 
"of  whom  Itad  families,  and  followed  the  bufinefs,  with  their 
"  wives  and  children,  yet  this  number  of  hands,  delivered  in  only 
"  fix  or  feven  hundred  ducats  worth  of  gold."  Take  half  of  the 
doubtful  feventh  hundred,  deduft  three  hundred  and  twenty  guilders 
head  money,  from  the  grofs  fum,  divide  the  remainder  among 
eighty  families,  and -each  will  receive  yearly  thirty  two  guilders, 
allot  to  each  day,  in  the  fummer  half  year.  Its  proportion,  it  will  be 
very  little  more  or  kfs  than  three  grofchens.  As  I  mentioned  above, 
the  labor  of  two  hundred  and  forty  Rudars,  produced,  in  the 
year  1764,  twelve  hundred  fifty  four  drams;  General  von  Bauer 
adds,  this  fum  was  exaftly  the  half  of  what  was  collefted,  over 
the  whole  country,  in  the  fame  year.  (55)  Now  as  thefc  GIpfies 
were  under  the  neceffity  of  parting  with  their  twelve  or  thirteen 
hundred  drams,  which  remained  after  the  capitation  tax  was 
paid,  to  the  grand  Armafch,  at  the  rate  of  two  lion  guilders  per 
dram ;  they  earned  ftill  lefs  than  thofe  in  the  Banat :  although  the 
rivers  in  Wallachia  contain  fufficient  plenty  of  gold,  to  make 
ten  times  that  advantage,  but  their  lazinefs  prevents  them.  The 
Tranfilvanian  rivers  yield  the  moft :  there  are  annually,  from 
eight  to  ten  hundred  weight  of  gold  feparated  from  their  fand, 
which  are  brought  to  Zalatnya,  (56)  to  be  difpofed  of.  As  this 
qviantity  is  not  produced  by  Gipfies  only,  but  by  the  Wallachians 
alfo,  and  we  have  no  account  of  the  grofs  number  of  goldwafliers, 

how 


(     41     ) 

^iow  many  of  them  are  Gipfies,  nor  what  proportion  they  have,  of  Chap.  VIT. 
ihefe  eight  hundred  weight;  it  is  impoflible  to  afcertainthe  profits 
of  the  Tranfilvanian  Gipfey  goltiwadiers.  That  they  are  better 
off,  than  thofc  in  the  Banat  and  other  places,  is  certain,  from  the 
circumftance,  of  the  rivers  abounding  more  with  gold,  than 
tlfewhere. 

I  Ihall  now  give  the  procefs  of  goldwafiilng,  in  the  words 
of  thofc,  who,  as  mineralogifts,  have  fuperintended  the  work. 
The  account  communicated  by  the  Councellor  von  Kotzian, 
Concerning  the  goldwafhing  in  the  Banat,  (57)  is  as  follows, 
"  The  operation  confiRs,  in  firft  providing  a  board  of  lime 
"  wood,  about  one  fathom  long,  and  half  a  fathom  broad, 
"  being  hollowed  at  the  upper  end,  in  the  form  of  a  dllh, 
"  from  which  are  cut  ten  or  twelve  channels,  in  an  oblique 
"  direclioh.  This  board  is  fixed  up,  fo  as  to  forin  an  angle  of 
"  forty  five  degrees  ^vith  the  horizon;  the  fand,  containing  the 
"  gold,  being  laid  in  the  upper  hollow,  a  quantity  of  water  is 
"  then  poured  upon  it,  which  carries  the  lighter  parts  over  the 
"  board;  fuch  as  as  are  more  heavy  they  fliove  down hy  hand ; 
"  what^remains  in  the  channels  or  furjows,  is  difcharged  into  ah 
"oblong  tray,  carried  to  the  ftraining  trough,  and  the  gold, 
"  which  remains,  picked  clean  out.  The  whole  of  this  work  is 
'*  performed  in  fo  carelefs  a  manner,  that  rnuch  pure  gold  is  loft, 
"  it  is  moreover  to  be  lamented,  that  the  Giplies  get  only  the 
''  gold,  which  is  perfeftly  feparated  from  the  fand,  bv:t  by  no 
'■•  means  any  that  fticks  to  the  ore,  which  they  throw  away,  though 
*'  there  is  gold  in  it." 

G  As 


^. 


4^     ) 


Ghap.  VII,  As  it  feems  to  be  evident,  that  this  method  is  not  at  ait  a 
provident  one,  confequently  that  much  gold  muft  be  wafted  :  we 
are  the  more  furprized,  when  another  author,  _  in  the  following 
words,  affures  us  of  the  contrary.  (58)  "  As  negligent  and 
"  carelefs  as  the  work  of  the  Gipfies  appears  at  firft  fight,  juft 
"•'  as  effeftual  it  tuins  out,  when  put  to  the  teft.  Daily  pradice 
"  gives  thefe  people  a  degree  of  difcernment,  without  which, 
"  another  perfon  would  think  they  muft  lofe  a  great  deal :  I 
"  convinced  myfelf  in  the  following  manner.  When  they  had 
"  finiftied  their  wafhing  on  the  board,  for  which  they  commoqly 
"'  ufed  from  fifteen  to  twenty  troughs  of  coarfe  ftuff.  I  divided 
•''  the  waflied  ftuff  into  thres  parcels,  the  ten  or  fifteen  uppermoft 
"  furrows,  always  contained  the  moft  gold,  the  fecond  divifion 
"'  not  more  than  an  eighth  part  as  much,  but  the  laft  fifteen  to 
"  twenty  furrows',  fcarcely  three  grains.  I  have  alfo  narrowly 
"  examined  the  refufe,  and  very  feldom  found  any  traces  of  gold 
*'  in  it." 

The  art  of  goldwafning  is  brought  to  much  greater  perfeftion  in 
Tranfilvania.  In  the  (59)defcription  of  it  in  thofe  parts,  it  is  faid, 
that  all  the  rivers,  brooks,  and  even  the  pools  which  the  rain 
forms,  in  Tranfilvania,  produce  gold ;  among  thefe  the  Aranyofch 
is  the  richeft,  infomuch,  that  hiftorians  in  thofe  countries,  compare 
it  to  the  Tagus  and  Paftolus.  Befides  the  Wallachians,  who  live 
by  the  rivers,  the  goldwaftiers  confift  chiefly  of  Gipfies.  They 
know,  with  the  greateft  exaftnefs,  where  they  can  wafh  to  advan- 
tage. Their  apparatus  for  this  work,  is  a  crooked  board,  four 
or  five  feet  long,  by  two  or  three  broad,  generally  provided  with 
a  wooden  rim  on  each  fide  ;    over  this  they  fpread  woollen  cloths, 

an.d 


•(     43     ) 

and  fliake  the  gold  fand  mixed  with  water,  upon  it;  the  fmall  Chap.  Vlf. 
grains  remain  flicking  to  the  doth,  they  wafli  thefe  cloths  in  a 
veflel  of  water,  then  feparate  the  gold  by  means  of  the  trough. 
When  they  find  larger  particles  of  (and,  in  their  wafliing,  they 
have  deeper  channels  made  in  the  middle  of  their  crooked  boards, 
which  flop  the  fmall  pieces  as  they  roll  down  :  they  examine 
thefe  fmall  flones  afterwards,  and  pick  fome  out,  which  are  fre- 
quently found  to  have  folid  gold  fixed  in  them. 

Thefe  are  the  cuflomary  tranfaftinns,  and  occupations  of  Giplies, 
in  the  different  countries,  and  ftates  of  Europe.  People  mufl 
not  imagine,  that  their  fmiths  fliops  are  continually  refounding 
with  the  hammer,  or  that  thofe  of  other  p'rofeflions,  are  fo  atten- 
tive to  their  callings,  as  to  provide  even  a  daily  fubfiflence ;  not 
to  think  of  a  comfortable  maintenance.  Their  lazinefs,  on  the 
contrary,  makes  lb  many  idle  hours  in  the  day,  that  their  family 
is  often  reduced  to  the  greatefl  diflrefs ;  for  which  reafon,  begging 
or  flealing,  are  by  far  more  common  methods,  (60)  than  dili- 
gence and  affiduous  application  to  bufinefs,  for  quieting  their 
hunger.  If  you  except  foldiers,  who  are  kept  in  order  by  thfe 
'difcipline  of  the  corporal,  with  fome  of  the  Tranfilvanian  gold- 
wafliers,  who  apply  to  mufic,  and  living  feparate  from  their  own 
caft,  in  conflant  habits  of  intercourf*  with  people  of  a  better  fort, 
have  thereby  acquired  more  civilized  manners,  and  learned  the 
■diflinclion,  if  not  between  right  and  wrong,  at  leaft  between  fecial 
'honor  (61)  and  difgrace,  the  remainder  arc  in  the  moft  unlimited 
fenfe,  arrant  thieves.  (62)  They  fcem  only  to  make  a  pretence  of 
working,  in  order  the  better  to  carry  on  their  thieving,  as  the 
articles  which  they  prepare  for  fale,   in  the   cities  knd  villages, 

G  2  furniili 


c  44  y 

Chap.  VII.     fprnifli  an  excellent  blind,  for  fneaking  into  houfes,  to  pry  wher% 
there  is  any    thing  which   they    may   appropriate    to  themfelves^ 
This  kind  of  artifice  is  particularly  the  province  of  the  women, 
who  have  always  bsen  reckoned  more  (63)  dextrous  than  the  men, 
in  the  art  of  ftealing.     They  commonly  take  children  with  them, 
which  are  tutored,  to  remain  behind,  in  the  outer  part  of  the 
houfe,  to  purloin  what  they  can,  while  the  mother  is  negociating 
(64)  in  the  chamber.     It  is  generally  the  women's  office,  to  make, 
away  with  the  boor's  geefe  and  fowls,  when  they  are  to  be  found  hi  a 
convenient  place.     If  the  creature  makes  a  noife  when  feized,  it  !% 
killed  and  drclfed  for  the  canfuraption  of  the  family,  but   if,   by. 
chance,  it  fhould  have   ftrayed  fo  far,  from  the  village,  that  its, 
crying  cannot  give  any   alarm,  they   keep   it  alive,   to  fell  at  the 
next  market  town.     Winter  is  the  time  when  the  wopien  generally. 
are   moft  called  upon  to   try  their  fkill  in  this  way  :  during  that 
leafon,  many  of  the  men.  remaiain  their  hvits,  fending  the  womea 
abroad  to  forage.     They  go  about  under  the  difguife  of  beggars, 
in  a  very  fcientific    manner,  and  commonly  carry  with  them  a 
couple  of  children,   miferably  expofed  to  the  cold  and.froft;  one 
of  thefe  is  led  in  the   hand,   the   other   tied  in  a  cloth  to   the 
woman's  back,    in  order  to  ex.cite  compaffion,    in  well  difpofed 
people.     They  alfo  tell  fortunes,  and  impofe  on  the  credulous  with 
amulets.    Befides  all  this,  they  feldom  return  to  their  hufbands  (65) 
without  fome  pilfered  booty.     Many  writers  confine  the  thefts  of 
the  Gipfies  to  fmall  matters,  and  will  not  allow  that  they  are  ever: 
guilty  of  violence.  (66)     This  is  not  only  denied  by  the  teftimony, 
(67)   of  others,  but  abfolutely  contradiifled   by  fome  recent   in- 
ftancea,     It  is  true  that,  on  account  of  their  natural  timidity,  they^ 

do 


(    45     ). 

do  nor  like  to  commit  a  robbery,  which  appears  to  be  attended     Chap.  VH.. 

with  great  danger,  nor  often  break  open  hoiifes  by  night,  as  other 

thieves  do :    they  rather   content  thcinfelves  with  fmall  matters, 

than,  as  tlicy  think,  deftroy  (68)  themfelves  at  once  by  a  great, 

and  dangerous  adlion.     Yet  we  have  more  than  one  (69)  proof,, 

that   they  make    no  fcruple    to  murder   a  traveller,    or   plunder 

cities   and  villages. 


CHAPTER      Vlir. 

On    their    marriages    and    education. 

X.  HERE  is  not,  perhaps,  any  other  people,  among  whorrc 
marriages  are  contracted  with  fo  little  confideration,  or  folemnized 
with  fo  little  ceremony,  as  among  the  Gipfies.  As  foon  as  a  boy 
has  attained  the  age  of  fourteen  or  fifteen  years,  he  begins  to  per- 
ceive, that  fomething  more  than  mere  eating  and  drinking,  is 
neceflary  to  him.  Having  no  fear  of  confequences,  nor  being- 
under  any  reftraint  from  his  parents,  he  forms  a  ( i )  conneiflion, 
with  the  girl  he  moft  fancies,  of  twelve,  or  at  moft  thirteen  years 
old,  without  any  fcruple  of  confcience,  (2)  whether  fhe  be  his 
neareft  relation,  or  an  entire  flranger.  God's  commandments  are 
unknown  to  him,  and  human  laws  cannot  have  much  influence, 
over  one  who  lives  in  a  defart,  remote  from  the  obfervation  of 
ajiy  ruling  power.  The  term  of  courclhip  is  very  (hort,  often 
only  long  enough  for  the  parties  to  communicate  their  mutual 
incjiination.     They  do   not  wait  for   any  marriage  ceremony,  as 

it. 


(     46     ) 

Chap.  ~V11I,  it  is  a  matter  of  no  confequence  to  them,  whether  it  be  performed 
afterwards,  or  not  at  all.  Yet  they  do  not  feem  to  be  entirely 
indifferent  about  matrimony,  not  on  account  of  conforming  to  any 
inftitution,  but  a  pride  they  have  in  imitating  what  is  done  by 
other  people,  left  they  Ihould  appear  to  be  inferior  to  them  : 
As  the  very  early  age  of  the  parties,  or  fome  other  irregularity, 
might  meet  with  objeftions  from  a  regular  clergyman,  they  fre- 
quently get  one  of  their  own  people  to  aCl  the  prieft,  and  tack  the 
decent  couple  together.  (3)  A  marriage  being  thus  accomplilhed, 
the  man  provides  a  ftone  for  an  anvil,  a  pair  of  pincers,  a  file, 
and  hammers  away  as  a  fmith,  or  works  at  fome  other  trade,  he 
may  have  juft  learned  from  his  father,  then  begins  his  perigrination. 
Should  his  wife  commit  a  fault  at  any  future  time,  he  gives  her 
half  a  dozen  boxes  on  the  car,  or  very  likely,  for  fome  trifling 
caufe,  turns  her  off  entirely.  (4)  Her  conduft  muff,  in  general 
be  very  much  regulated  by  his  will,  and  flie  is  obliged  to  be  more 
attentive  to  him  than  to  herfelf.  It  is  always  to  be  remembered,  that 
a  Gipfey  never  marries  a  perfon  who  is  not  of  the  true  Gipfey  (5) 
breed.  When  the  woman  lyes  in,  which  happens  frequently,  thefe 
people  being  remarkably  fruitful,  (6)  the  child  is  brought  forth, 
either  in  their  miferable  hut,  or,  according  to  circumftances,  it 
may  be  in  the  open  air,  but  always  eafily  and  fortunately,  a  woman 
of  the  fame  kind  performs  the  office  of  midwife.  True  Gipfey 
like,  for  want  of  fome  veffel,  they  dig  a  hole  in  the  ground,  which 
is  filled  with  cold  water,  and  the  new  born  child  waflied  in  it. 
This  being  done,  it  is  wrapped  up  in  fome  old  rags,  which 
the  motherly  forefight  has  taken  care  to  provide.  Next  comes 
:.the  chriftening,    at    which    ceremony   they    prefer   ftrangers,    for 

witneffes. 


(    47     )'- 

witnefTes,  rather  than  their  own  caft  :  but  what  kind  of  folks  they     Chap.  VIII,. 

are,  may  be  coUeded  from  the  mode  of  entertaining  them.     When 

the  chriftening  is  over,  the  father  takes  the  fponfers  to  an  (7)  ale- 

houfe,  or  if  none  be  near,  to  fome  other  houfe,  where  he  treats 

them  with  cakes  and  brandy.     If  he  is  a  little  above  the  loweft 

ftate  of  mifery,  and  has  a  mind  to  be  generous,  other  things  are 

provided  ;  but  he  does  not  join  the  company,  being  taken  up  with 

ferving  his  guefls.     Thus  the  affair  ends.     The  lying  in  woman, 

paffes  her  Ihort  time  of  confinement,  feldom  exceeding  eight  days, 

with  her  child,  in  the  hut,  or  under  a  tent,  in  the.fmoak  by  the    . 

fire.     Refrelhments  are  fometimes  fent  from  the  godfathers  and 

godmothers,  yet  they  are  often  fo  uncivil,  that  they  do  not  hefitate 

to  quarrel  with,  or  even  to  difcharge  them  (8)  from  the   trufl:, 

if  they  think  the  prefent  they  make  too  fmall,  or  they  do  not 

lilffe   the  provilions   fent   to    them.      When   this    happens,    they 

have  another  chriftening,  in  fome  other  place,  nay  fometimes  even 

a   third.    (9) 

Some  of  the  Gipfey  women,  as  already  mentioned,  are  accuf- 
tomed  to  fmear  their  children  over  with  a  particular  kind  of . 
dintment,  then  lay  thejn  in  the  fun,  or  before  the  fire,  in  order 
that  the  Ikin  may  be  more  compleatly  parched,  and  their  black 
beauty  thereby  increafed.  They  do  not  ufe  a  cradle,  nor  even 
poffefs  fuch  a  piece  of  furniture ;  the  child  fleeps,  either  in  its 
mother's  arms,  or  on  the  ground.  When  the  lying  in  is  over,  the 
Gipfey  woman  goes  to  church,  and  immediately  from,  thence,  either 
to  begging  or  ftealing.  While  the  child  remains  in  her  arms,  flie 
perhaps  imagines  that  people  will  be  more  merciful  in  their  chaf- 
tifements,  is  more  rapacious  than  at  other  times,  and  takes, whatever 

fhs.. 


-,'i*. 


(     4S      ) 

Cnap.  VIII.  fliC  Tan  lay  her  hands  on.  If  flie  cannot  efcapc  without  a  beat- 
ing, flie  fcreens  herfelf  by  holding  up  the  child  to  receive  the 
blows,  till  (he  has  an  opportunity  of  retiring  imperceptibly,  and 
running  away. 

As  the  child  gets  a  little  ftronger,  and  attains  the  age  of  three 
or  four  months,  the  mother  feldom  carries  it  any  longer  on  the 
arm,  but  at  her  back,  where  it  fits,  winter  and  fummer,  in  a 
.  linen  rag,  with  its  head  over  the  flioulder,  of  the  perfon  who 
carries  it.  If  (lie  gets  more  children,  in  a  courfe  of  time,  which 
flie  feldom  fails  to  do,  ss  this  race  of  beings  is  fo  prolllick,  flie 
leads  one  or  two  by  the  haiid,  while  fuch  as  are  older  run  by  her 
fide,  and  thus  attended,  Ihe  ftroUs  through  the  villages  and  into 
houfes.  Notwithftanding  their  dark  complexion,  and  bad  nurfing, 
writers  are  unanimous  in  their  teftimony,  that  thefe  chudren 
are  good  looking,  well  fliaped,  lively,  clever,  and  have  fine  (lo) 
eyes.  The  mother  plaits  their  black  hair  on  the  crown  of  the 
head,  partly  to  keep  it  out  of  their  face,  and  partly  for  ornament. 
TJiis  is  all  flie  ever  does  towards  drefling  her  child  out,  for  in 
fummer  they  wear  no  cloaths  till  ten  years  of  age,  and  in  winter 
they  are  forced  to  be  content  with  a  few  old  rags  hung  about 
them. 

As  foon  as  the  boy  or  girl  cati  go  about,  it  is  taught  to  dance, 
which  confifts  in  jumping  about  on  one  foot,  and  conflantly  ftrik- 
ing  themfelves  behind  with  the  other.  As  the  children  grow  up, 
this  dance  is  increafed,  with  all  forts  of  poftures,  by  which  they 
ftrive  to  divert,  and  get  fomething  from,  every  body,  that 
pafles  their  parent's  habitation.  What  they  are  farther  taught, 
.efpecially  by  their  mothers,    is  the  art  of  dealing,    which  they 

often 


(     49     ) 

often  put  in  praclice,  as  defcribed  above.      Inftruclion  or  fchool     Chap.  VIIL 
are  never   thought    of,    nor  do  they   learn  any  bufinefs,    except 
perhaps   blowing   the   fire,  when  the  father   forges,    or  to   aiTift 
in  goldwafhino;. 

In  the  twelfth  or  thirteenth  year,  a  boy  acquires  fome  knowledge 
of  his  father's  trade,  and  then  becomes  emancipated  from  parental 
authority ;  as  at  this  time  he  gets  into  hin  head,  the  idea  of 
forming  (ii)  his  own  feparate  connexions.  What  is  common 
to   uncivilized    people,    holds    good    with   the    Giplies,    I    mean 

'unbounded  love  for  their  children  ;    this  is  the  fource  of  the  moft  ' 

unpardonable  negleft.     Gipfey  children  never  feel  the  rod,  they 
fly  out  into  the  moft  violent  paffions,  at  the  fame  time  hear  nothing 

■from  their  parents  but  flattery  and  (12)  coaxing.  In  return, 
they  acl,  as  is  commonly  the  conlequence  of  fuch  education, 
with  the  greateft  (13)  ingratitude.  This  exceffive  fondnefs  for 
their  children,  is  attended  with  one  advantage,  that  when 
they  are  indebted  to  any  body,  which  frequently  happens, 
in  Hungary  and  Tranfilvania ;  the  creditor  feizes  a  child,  and  by 
that  means  gets  his  demJtnd  fatisfied ;  as  the  Gipfey  immediately 
exerts  every  method  to  difcharge  the  debt,  and  procure  the  releafe 
of  his  (14)  darling  offspring. 

Such  is  the  pifture  of    Gipfey   marriages,    and  education,    te 

Which  th6ve  are  but- few  exceptions ;- and  thofe  oniy  of  a  frnall  pro- 
portion of  them  who  have  fixed  habitations.  The  charader  of 
people  being  formed  by  their  education ;  how  can  it  be  wondered 
at,  that  Gipfies  fliould  be,  idlers,  thieves,  mm'derers,  and  incen- 
•diaries.  Is  k  probable,  that  man  fliould  become  diligent,  v.ho  has 
l)een  educated  in  kzinefs  ?  Can  it  be  expe&ed  tkov  fliould  leave 

1 1  every 


(     5°     ) 

Ghap.  VIII.  every  one  in  pofleflion  of  their  own  property,  when  father  and, 
mother  have  taught  them  to  fteal,  from  their  earlieft  infancy  ? 
Who  can  have  a  general  idea  of  fair  dealing,  that,  knows  not 
right  from  wrong,  nor  has  ever  learned  the  diftindion  between 
good  and  evil,  virtue  and  vice  ?•  Punifhments  infiifted  on  others, 
for  their  crimes,  have  no  effeft  upon  one,  who  is  not  fufficiently. 
attentive,  to  take  warning  by  the  examples  of  ftrangers ;  and  when 
his  own  experience  teaches  him,  that  he.isjiot  to  lay  hands  on  the 
property  of  others,  the  milder  punifliments  leave  no  lafling  (15) 
impreffion ;  the  more  fevere  ones,  which  reach  the  life,  cannot 
have  the  efte<fl,  it  being  impoffible  for  a  thief  to  grow  better,  after 
he  has  bocn  hanged.  So  long  therefore  as  their  education  conti- 
nues to  be  what  it  is,  we  cannot  hope,  that  they  fliould  leav.e  ci« 
to  be  thieves  and.  murderers. 


CHAPTER       IX. 

On    their  fuknefs,    death,    and   burial. 

iVluCH  has  been  faid,  above,  concerning  the  conftant  good 
health  of  thefe  people,  and  it  is  fadl^  that  they  do  enjoy  it  more 
uninterruptedly,  and  perfeftly,  than  the  moft  regular  people,  who 
pay  the  greateft  attention  to  themfelves.  They  get  no  cold  noi; 
defluxions,  from  the  inclemency  of  the  air.  They  are  not  liable 
to  rafhes,  even  poifon,  or  epidemical  diforders,  have  no  effeft  on, 
them.  Any  prevailing  ficknefs  penetrates  fooner  into  ten  habita- 
tlQjis  of  civilized  people,  than  it.  find  its  way  under  a  Gipfey'5 

tent. 


(    51     ) 

tent,  or  into  his  hut.     They  arc  equally  liable  to  the  fmall-pox     Chap.  TX. 
and  meafles,  with  other  people,  though  with  infinitely  lefs  danger 
of  being  carried  off  by  them,  and  they  are  fubjeft  to  a  diforder  in  »■ 

the  eyes,  occafioned  by  the  continual  finoak  and  fleam  in  their 
huts,  during  the  winter  f'eafon ;  in  other  refpefts,  the  Gipfies 
experience  no  inconveniences  till  the  time  comes,  that  nature 
demands  her  own  back  again,  and  entirely  deflroys  the  machine. 
Though  this  be  not  always  at  a  great  old  age,  it  is  generally  at 
a  pretty  advanced  one  ;  it  being  very  uncommon  for  a  Gipfey  to 
die,  early  in  life,  or  in  his  childhood.  Their  love  of  life  is 
beyond,  defcription,  yet  they  hardly  ever  take  the  advice  of  a 
phyfician,  or  ufe  medicines  ;  even  ift'the  riiofl  dangerous  maladies. 
They  generally  leave  every  thing  to  nature  or  good  fortune  :  if 
they  do  rt/7)- thing,  it  is,  to  mix  a  little  faifron  in 'their  foup,  or 
bleed  and  fcarify  themfelves  ;  having  obferved  that  their  horfes 
ufe  bleeding,  as  a  remedy  for  diforders.  When  the  ficknefs  indi- 
cates that  he  is  likely  to  be  very  bad,  and  the  univerfal  enemy  to 
life  is  rellly  In  earnefl,  he  breaks  out  into  fighs  and  lamentations, 
on  account  of  his  departure  ;  till  at  lafl  he  gives  up  the  ghoft,  in 
his  ufual  place  of  relidence,  under  a  tree,  or  in  his  tent. 

As  the  preparations  for  death  a:re,  generally,  regulated  according 
to  a  perfon's  notions  of  religion,  fo  a  Gipfey,  who  neither  knows 
nor  believes  any  thing,  concerning  the  immortality  of  the  foul,  or 
of  rewards  and  punilliments,  beyond  this  life,  for  the  moft  part 
dies  like  a  beaft,  who  is  ignorant  of  himfelf  and  his  Creator,  as 
well  as  utterly  incapable  of  forming  any  opinion  about  an  higher 
defli  nation. 

Ill  The 


(     5^     ) 

Chi'.p,  IX.  The  inftant  the  perfon  Is  deceafed,  begins  the  crying,  lamentuig, 
and  tearing  the  hair,  of  a  woman  for  her  hufband,  or  children  for 
their  parent.  Parents,  in  particular,  who  have  loft  their  children, 
appear  inconfolable.  Little  can  be  faid  of  their  burials,  only, 
that  on  this  occafion  the  cries  and  bewailings  are  redoubled, 
and  become  very  violent.  When  the  leader  of  an  hord  dies, 
things  are  condufled  more  quietly.  His  own  people  carry  him, 
with  great  refpeft,  to  the  grave,  where  each  one  appears  earneft 
and  attentive ;  although,  at  the  fame  time  eipployed  in  a  manner 
to  excite  laughter. 

This  is  the  manner  of  proceeding  when  a  Gipfey  dies  a  natural 
death.  It  often  happens  that  he  lofes  his  life  by  violent  means, 
not  by  his  own  hands,  for  felf  murder  or  deftroylng  their  offspring, 
are  equally  unheard  of  among  them.  No  Gipfey  ever  puts  a 
period  to  his  own  exiftence  on  account  of  vexation,  anxiety  or 
defpair,  he  is  much  too  fond  of  it,  behdes,  that  care  or  defpair 
are  unknown  to  him. 

Even  in  the  grcateft  diilrefs,  he  is  never  troubled  with  low  fpirits; 
ever  merry  and  blythe,  he  dies  not  till  he  cannot  help  it :  this 
often  happens  on  the  gallows,  attended  with  fccnes,  ridiculous  as 
the  moft  ludicrous  imagination  could  invent.  One  man  requefted, 
as  a  particular  aft  of  grace,  that  he  might  not  be  hanged  with  his 
face  towards  the  high  road,  faying,  "  many  of  his  acquaintance 
"  paffed  that  way,  and  he  fliould  be  very  much  afliamed,  to  be 
*'  feen  by  them,  hanging  on  a  gallows."  Another  time  the  rela- 
tions of  one  who  was  leading  to  execution,  perceiving  by  the 
difcourfe  and  geftures  of  the  criminal,  how  unwillingly  he  advanced, 
flot  having  the  lalft  inclination  tojjc  hanged;  addreffed  themfelves 

to 


(    53     ) 

to  tile  magiflratcs  and  officers  of  juftice,  with  the  following  wife     Chan,  IX. 

remonftrance.      "  Gentlemen,    pray    do   not    compel  a  man,    to 

"  a  thing  for  which  you  fee  he  has  no  defirc  nor  inclination." 

Such  laughable  fcenes  happen,  at  almoft  every  Gipfcy  execution, 

which  arc  proofs  of  the  inconfiderate  way  of  thinking  of  thefe- 

people.    ( I ) 

CHAPTER       X. 

Political   regulations,   peculiar    to-  the    Gipjies.  . 

VV  HEN  the  Gipfies  firft  arrived  in  Europe,  they  had  different 
le&ders  and  chiefs,  to  conduft  the  various  tribes  in  which  they 
came*  This  was  necelfary,  in  order  to  facilitate  their  progrefs,. 
through  different  countries,  and  quarters  of  the  globe ;  or  in  cafe 
it  fliould  be  requifite,  to  unite  their  force,  and  thereby  make  a 
more  formidable  refiftance,  when  oppofed ;  likewife  to  carry  any 
plan,  they  might  have  formed,  'more  readily  into  execution.  In  con- 
fequence  of  this,  in  the  old  books,  v.e  find  mention  made  of 
Knights,  Counts,  Dukes  and  Kings.  Not  only  Krantz  (i) 
and  MuNSTER,  (2)  mention  Counts  and  Knights,  in  general, 
terms,  among  the  Gipfies ;  other  people  give  us  the  very  names 
of  thefe  dignified  men;  Crvsius  (3)  cites  a  Duke  Michael; 
MuRATORi  a  Duke  Andreas;  (4)  and  Aventinus  records 
a  King  Zindelo  :  (5)  not  to  talk  of  ini'criptions  on  monuments, 
erefted  in  different  places,  to  the  memories  of  Duke  Panuel, 
Count  Johannis,  and  a  noble  Knight  Petrus,  in  the  fifteenth 
(6)    century.     But  it.  does  not  reqijire  any   comment,  to  Ihew, 

how 


(     54     ) 

*Chn;-).  X.  liow  improperly  thefe  appellations  were  applied.  Although  the 
Gipfey  chiefs  might  be  pleafed  with  thefe  titles,  their  dependents 
too  might  efteem  them  people  of  rank ;  it  was  nothing  but  ridi- 
culous imitation  of  Avhat  they  had  feen  and  admired  among  civi- 
lized  people. 

Neverthclefe,  the  cuftom  of  having  Chiefs  and  Heads  over 
them  prevails  to  this  time,  at  leaft  in  Hungary  and  Tranfdvania ; 
probably  it  may  alfo  ffcill  exift  in  Turkey  and  other  countries, 
where  thefe  people  live  together  in  great  numbers.  I  only  iflention 
Hungary  with  Tranfdvaaia,  becaufe  I  have  pofitive  teftimony 
of  it. 

Their  Chiefs,  or  Waywodes,  as  they  proudly  call  them,  were 
Tormetly  of  two  kinds  in  Hungary.  Each  petty  tribe  had  its 
own  leader ;  befides  which,  they  had  four  fuperior  Waywodes,  of 
their  own  caft,  on  both  fides  the  Danube  and  Teiffe ;  whofe  ufual 
refidences  were  at  Raab,  Lewentz,  Szathmar,  and  KASCHAti: 
to  thefe  the  fmaller  (7)  Waywodes  were  accountable.  There 
would  be  great  reafon  to  wonder,  how  ahy  well  regulated  ftate,  could 
allow  thefe  people  fuch  a  diftinft  eftablifliment,  in  the  heart  of 
there  country,  did  not  the  Hungarian  writers  affign  a  reafon  for 
it :  viz.  that  in  the  commotions  and  troubles,  occafioned  by  the 
Turkifli  wars,  in  former  centuries,  they  were  more  eafily  fummoned, 
when  occafion  required,  (8)  and  rendered  ufeful  to  the  ftate  by 
means  of  their  Waywodes.  But  the  Gipfies  in  Hungary  and 
Tranfilvania,  were  fo  circumftanced,  as  not  to  be  at  liberty  to  chufe 
any  except  the  fmall  Waywodes  of  each  tribe,  from  their  own 
people,  but  not  the  fuperior  Waywodes.  Thefe  fuperintendants, 
xo  whom  the  Gipfies,  in  many  diftridts,  were  fubjeft,  have  exifted 

till 


(    55    )■ 

till  lately;  there  is  ftill  one  in  Tranfilvania,  who  has  jurifdiction  Chap.  X* 
over  the  goldwafhers,  but  they  were  appointed  by  the  court,  and 
always  felefted  from  the  Hungarian  (9)  Nobility.  It  was  by  no 
means  a  defpicable  appointment,  as  each  Gipicy  was  bound  to  pay 
him  a  guilder  (10)  annually,  of  which  one  half  was  demanded 
at  Eafter,  the  other  half  at  ( 1 1 )  at  Michaelmas.  In  order  to  render 
the  levying  this  tax  more  certain,  the  magiftrates,  ia  all  towns^ 
cities  and  villages,  were  ordered  to  be  aflifting  to  the  colle£tors, 
where  neceffary;  to  proteft  them  alfo,  (12)  from  any  violence  that 
might  be  offered  by  the  Gipfies. .  Thefe  fuperior  Waywodes  are  now 
no  longer  appointed,  (13)  except  the  fingle  one  in  Tranfilvania, 
who  has  authority  over  the  goldwafliers  in  thofe  parts.  But,  the 
Gipfies  ftill  continue  the  cuftom,  among  themfelves  of  dignifying 
certain  perfons,  whom  they  make  heads  over  them,  and  call  by 
the  exalted  Scalvonian  title,  Waywode.  They  take  the  opportu- 
nity, when,  a  great  number  of  Gipfies  are  affembled  ia  one  place, 
to  chufe  their  Wa^'wode,  which  is  commonly  done  in  the  open 
field.  The  elected  perfon  is  lifted  up  three  times,  amidft  the 
loudefl  acclamations,  and  confirmed  in  his  dignity  by  prefents ; 
his  wife  undergoes  the  fame  ceremony.  When. this  folemnity  is 
performed,  they .  feparate  with  great  conceit,  and  iriiagine  them- 
felves people  of  more  confequence,  than  Electors  returning  from 
the  choice  of  an  Emperor.  Every  one  is  capable  of  being  eleded, 
who  is  of  a  family,  defcended  from  a  former  Waywode  :  but  thofe 
have  generally  the  preference,  who  are  beft  cloathed,  not  very 
poor,  of  a  large  ftature,  and  about  the  middle  age.  Underftanding 
or  wile  conduft  have  nothing  to  do  in  the  bufinefs.  Therefore  it 
is  eafy  to  diftinguifh  the  Waywode  from  the  multitude,  by  obferving 

his^.. 


C    56    ) 

Chiip.  X.  his  fize  and  cloathing.  The  particular  diftingiiifliing  mark  of 
dignitj',  is  a  large  whip,  hanging  over  the  (houlder.  His  outward 
deportment,  his  walk  and  air,  alfo  plainly  fliew  his  head  to  be 
fluffed  with  notions   of  (14)  authority. 

I  have  not  been  able  to  difcOver,  how  far  his  fway  over  his 
fubjefts  extends.  A  diftinftion  muft  here  be  made,  whether  the  ilate 
gives  him  any  power,  and  what  he  afliames  or  derives  by  cuftom 
from  his  cafl.  It  were  ridiculous  to  believe,  that  the  ftate  fhould, 
on  any  occafion,  appoint  this  fort  of  illuflrious  perfonage  a  judge. 
In  Tranfilvania,  indeed,  the  magiflrates  do  interfere,  with  regard 
to  the  fellow  whom  this  or  that  hord  have  elefted  Chief,  and 
impofe  ani  obligation  on  him;  but  it  is  only,  that  he  fhall  be 
careful,  to  prevent  his  nimble  fubjefts  from  abfconding,  when  the 
time  comes,  for  them  to  difcharge  their  annual  tribute  at  the 
Land  Regent's  chamber.  He  has  no  right  to  meddle  with 
difputes  or  quarrels,  whidi  the  Gipfies  have  among  themfelves,  or 
with  other  people  ;  farther  than  to  give  notice  of  them,  to  the 
regular  courts  of  the  (15)  diftridl  they  happen  to  be  in.  In  this 
point  of  view,  it  is  perfectly  true  what  Toppeltin,  and  others 
after  him,  aflert,  that  they  have  little  or  no  power  over  their 
own  (16)  people  :  but  if  we  attend  to  their  aftions,  the  affair 
carries  a  very  different  appearance.  Whenever  a  complaint  is 
made,  that  any  of  their  people  have  been  guilty  of  theft,  the 
Waywode  not  only  orders  a  general  fearch  to  be  made,  in  every 
tent  or  hut,  and  returns  the  flolen  goods  to  the  owner,  if  they 
can  be  fovmd,  but  punifhes  the  thief,  in  prefencc  of  the  com- 
plainant^ with  his  whip.  Certainly  it  is  not  by  any  written  contraft, 
that  he  acquires  his  right  over  the  people,  for  no  fuch  thing  exifls 

amonii 


(     57     ) 

among  them,  but  cuftom  gives  him  this  judicial  power.  Moreover  Chap.  X. 
he  does  not  punifli  the  aggreflbr  from  any  regard  to  juflice,  but 
rather  to  quiet  the  plaintiff,  and  at  the  fame  time  to  make  his 
people  more  wary  in  their  thefts,  as  well  as  more  dextrous,  in 
concealing  their  prey.  Thefe  very  materially  concern  him,  fince, 
by  every  difcovery  that  is  made,  his  income  fuffers  ;  as  the  whole 
profit  of  his  office  arifes  from  his  (hare  of  the  articles  that  are  - 
ftolen.  Every  time  any  one  brings  in  a  booty,  he  is  obliged  to 
give  information,  to  the  arch  Gipfey,  of  his  fuccefsful  enterprife, 
then  render  a  juft  account,  of  what  and  how  much  he  has  flolen ; 
in  order  that  the  proper  divillon  may  be  made.  This  is  the 
fituation  where  a  Gipfey  looks  on  himfelf  bound  to  give  a  fair 
and  tnie  detail,  though  in  every^  other  inftance  he  does  not  hefitate 
to  perjure  (17)  himfelf.  We  may  therefore  judge  how  precarious 
the  fuccefs  is  likely  to  be,  when  a  Waywode  is  applied  to  for  the 
recovery  of  ftolen  goods.  The  Gipfies  are  cunning  enough,  to 
hide  what  they  have  pilfered,  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  out  of  an 
hundred  fearches,  the  complainer  hardly  once  accomplifhes  his 
defire.  It  does  not  at  all  forward  the  caufe,  that  the  Wajnvode 
knows  who  the  thief  is  :  his  interefl  requires  him  to  difTemble. 
Thus,  though  he  does  not  fteal  himfelf,  the  Spanilli  proverb  is  a 
very  true  one:  "The  Count  and  the  Gipfey  are  (18)  rogues 
"  alike."  For  which  reafon  people  have  left  off  applying  to  fo 
fufpicious  a  judge.  If  a  thief  is  catched  in  the  fad,  the  owner 
takes  his  booty  away,  and  gives  him  his  proper  reward,  or  elfe 
delivers  him  over  to  the  civil  powei",  for  correclion ;  Here  enfues 
a  truly  laughable  fcene  :  As  Toon  as  the  officer  feizes  on,  and 
carries  away  the  peifon,  he  is  furrounded  by  a  fwarm  of  Gipfies, 

1  who 


(     58     ) 

Chap.  X.  who  take  unfpeakable  pains,  to  procure  the  releafe  of  the  prifoner^ 
They  endeavour  to  cajole  him  with  kind  words,  defire  him  to 
confider  this,  that,  and  the  other,  or  admonilh  him  not  to  be  fo 
uncivil.  When  it  comes  to  the  infliction  of  punilTiment,  and  the 
malefaftor  receives  a  good  number  of  lafhes,  well  laid  on,  in  the 
public  market  place  ;  an  univerfal  lamentation  commences  among 
the  vile  crew ;  each  ftretches  his  throat,  to  cry  over  the  agony, 
their  dear  affociate  is  conftrained  to  fuller.  This  is  oftener  the 
fate  of  the  women  than  of  the  men,  as  the  maintenance  of  the 
family  depends  more  upon  them,  they  more  frequently  go  out 
for  pkrnder.  (19) 

CHAPTER      XL 

On    the    religion    of  the    Gipjies, 


T. 


HESE  people  did  not  bring  any  particular  religion  with 
them  from  their  native  country ;  by  which,  as  the  Jews,  they  could 
be  diftinguifhed  among  other  perfons ;  but  regulate  themfelves,  in 
religious  matters,  according  to  the  country  where  they  live.  Being 
very  inconftant  in  their  choice  of  refidence,  they  are  likewife  fo  in 
refpedl:  to  religion.  No  Gipfey  has  an  idea  of  fubmiffion  to  any 
fixed  profeflTion  of  faith  :  ( i )  it  is  as  eafy  for  him  to  change  his 
religion,  at  every  new  village,  as  for  another  perfon  to  fliift  his  coat. 
They  fuffer  themfelves  to  be  baptifed  in  Chriftian  countries; 
among  Mahometans  to  be  circumcifed.  They  are  Greeks  with 
Greeks,  Catholics  with  Catholics,  and  again  profefs  themfelves  to 

be 


C     59     ) 

be  Proteftants,  whene\-er  they  happen  (2)  to  refide  where  that  is     chap.  XI. 
the  prevailing  religion. 

From  this  mutability,  we  conceive  what  kind  of  ideas  they 
have,  and  from  thence  we  may  deduce  their  general  opinions  of 
religion.  As  parents  fuffer  their  children  to  grow  up,  without 
either  education  or  infti-uftion,  and  were  reared  in  the  fame  manner 
themfelves,  fo  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  have  any  knowledge 
of  God  or  religion.  Very  few  of  them  like  to  attend  to  any 
difcourfe  on  the  fubject,  they  hear  what  is  faitl  with  indifference, 
nay  rather  with  impatience  and  repugnance ;  defpifing  all  remon- 
ftrance,  believing  nothing,  they  live  on  w  ithout  the  leaft  foUici- 
tude,  concerning  what  fliall  become  of  them  after  this  life.  An 
inftance,  quoted  by  Toppeltin,  will  fully  illuftrate  this  matter. 
Gne  of  the  more  civilized  Gipfies  in  Tranfilvania,  took  the  refo- 
lution  of  fending  his  foh  to  fchool  :  leave  being  obtained  from  the 
government,  the  lad  was  admitted,  and  was  going  on  very  well, 
under  his  teachers  hands.  The  child  died,  whereupon  the  relations 
applied  immediately  to  the  magiftrates,and  the  clergy, for  permiffion 
to  give  the  young  man  Chrifhian  burial,  he  being  a  ftudent  at  the 
time  of  his  death.  On  this  occalion  the  prieft  afked  whether  they 
believed  the  deceafed  Ihould  rife  again  at  the  laft  day.  "  Strange 
"  idea"  they  anfwered,  "  to  beliexe,  that  a  carcafe,  a  lifelefs  corpfe, 
"  Jhould  he  reanimated,  and  rife  again :  in  our  opinion  it  zvould-be  no 
"  more  likely  to  happen  to  him,  than  to  the  horfe  zve  Jlayed  a  few  days 
"  ago."  (3)  In  this  manner  the  greatefh  part  of  thefe  people  think, 
with  regard  to  religion ;  it  naturally  follows,  that  their  condudl 
fliould  be  conformable  to  fuch  opinions  and  conceptions.  Every 
duty  is   neglecled,  no   prayer  ever  pafles  their  lips,  as  little  are 

J  2  thev 


(     6o     ) 

Chap.  XI.  they  to  be  found  in  any  aflembly  of  public  worfliip  :  from  whence 
the  Wallachians  have  a  faying.  "  The  Gipfies  chvirch  was  built 
"  with  bacon,  and  the  dogs  ate  it."  (4)  The  religious  party, 
from  which  a  Gipfey  apoflatifes,  as  little  lofes  a  brother  believer, 
as  the  one  into  which  he  goes  acquires  one.  He  is  neither  Maho- 
metan, nor  Chriftian;  for  the  doftrines  of  Mahomet,  and  of  Chrift, 
are  alike  unknown  or  indifferent  to  him,  producing  no  other  effeft, 
than,  that  in  Turkey  his  child  is  circumcifed,  and  baptifed  in 
Chriftendom.  Even  this  is  not  done  from  any  motive  of  reverence 
for  the  commands  of  religion,  at  leaft  the  circumftance,  of  a  Gipfey's 
chufing  to  have  his  child  feveral  times  baptifed,  in  order  to  get 
more  chriftening  money,  flrongly  indicates  a  very  different 
reafon.  (5) 

This  is  the  ftate  of  the  Gipfey  religion,  in  every  country  where 
they  are  found.  It  is  true,  that  in  this,  as  well  as  in  other  things, 
there  may  be  exceptions,  but  they  are  very  rare ;  (6)  by  much 
the  greateft  part  of  them  are  as  above  defcribed.  V/herefore  the 
more  (7)  ancient,  as  well  as  the  more  (8)  modern  writers,  agree, 
in  pol'itively  denying,  that  the  Gipfies  have  any  religion;  and 
place  them  even  below  the  Heathens.  (9)  This  fentence  cannot 
poffibly  be  contradicted ;  fince,  fo  far  from  having  any  religion, 
they  have  an  averfion  to  every  thing  which  in  the  leaft  relates 

r-       to     it. 


CHAPTER 


(     6.     ) 

CHAPTER       XII. 

fkcir    language^   fciences,    and   arts. 

IJESIDES  that  every  Gipfey  underftands  and  fpeaks  the 
language  of  the  country  where  he  lives ;  thefe  people  having 
been  always  famed,  for  their  knowledge  of  various  ones,  (i) 
acquired  by  their  frequent  removal  from  place  to  place;  they 
have  a  general  language  of  their  own,  in  which  they  always  con- 
verfe  with  each  (2)  other.  Writers  are  of  difFerent  opinions, 
concerning  this,  whether  it  be  a  fadlitious  language,  or  really 
that  of  any  country,  and  who  are  the  people,  from  whom  it 
originates.  Some  pronounce  it  a  mere  (3)  jargon,  others  fay  it 
is  (4)  gibberifh.  We  can  by  no  means  agree  with  the  firft,  as 
the  only  oround  for  the  aflertion  is  barely,  that  they  do  not  know 
any  other  language,  correfpondent  to  that  of  the  Gipiles.  Bue 
they  do  not  feem  to  have  confidered,  how  extravagant  a  furmife 
it  is,  to  believe  a  whole  language,  an  invention,  that  too  of  people 
nide,  uncivilized  and  hundreds  of  miles  diftant  from  each  other. 
This  opinion  is  too  extravagant  to  employ  more  time  to  contro- 
vert it.  The  Gipfey  language  cannot  be  admitted,  for  gibberifh 
neither;  unlefs  by  thofe  who  know  nothing  of  the  former,  or  are 
totally  ignorant  of  the  latter,  which  is  cornipt  (5)  German; 
whereas  the  former  has  neither  German  words,  inflexions,  nor  the 
leaft  affinity  in  found.  No  German  would  comprehend  a  fingle 
expreflion,  although  he  fhould  liften,    a  whole  dviy,   to  a  Gipfey 

r'^'^'-rfation. 


Chap.  XII. 


(      62      ) 

Chap.  XII.  converfatlon.  (6)  A  third  party  allow,  that  the  language  of  the 
original  Gipfies  was  really  vernacular,  and  that  of  fome  country, 
but  alfert,  it  to  be  lb  difguifed  and  fallified,  partly  with  defign  of 
the  Giplies  themfelves,  partly  by  adventitious  events,  through 
length  of  time,  and  the  continual  wandering  of  thele  people, 
that  it  is  entirely  new  formed,  and  now  ufed  by  the  Gipfies  (7) 
only.  This  opinion  contains  much  truth,  but  carries  the  matter 
too  far,  in  not  allowing  that  any  traces  remain,  to  prove  any 
particular  one  to  be  the  Gipfies' mother  tongue.  Perhaps  the  great 
Bi'ifching  means  the  fame  thing,  when  he  fays,  "  the  Gipfey 
"  language  is  a  mixture  of  corrupt  words  from  the  Wallachian, 
"  Sclavonian,  Hungarian,  and  other  (8)  nations."  Among  thefe, 
the  beft  founded  notion  may  be,  that  it  is  the  dialed  of  fome 
particular  country,  though  no  longer  fo  pure  as  it  is  in  the  country 
from  whence  it  (9)  originated.  This  opinion  meets  the  greateft 
concurrence  of  the  learned ;  and  will,  I  hope,  be  fully  proved, 
in  another  part  of  this  book,  where  I  (liall  difcufs  the  fubjeft  again, 
more  fvilly,  in  order  to  corroborate  my  other  proofs  of  the  origin 
of  this  people.  Then  it  will  be  certified,  in  what  country  this  is 
the  native,  mother  tongue.  This  is  a  point,  concerning  which, 
moft  writers  think  differently.  Sometimes  the  Gipfies  are  Hebrew?, 
then  Nubians,  Egyptians,  Phrygians,  Vandals,  Sclavonians,  or, 
as  opinions  vary,  perhaps  fomething  elfe. 

It  appears  extraordinary,  that  the  language  of  a  people,  who 
•have  lived  centuries  among  us,  and  has  been  matter  of  enquiry, 
almofl  ever  fince,  fliould  ftill  remain  an  affair  of  fo  much  uncer- 
tainty. Gipfies  are  to  be  found  every  where,  and  might  be  very 
eafily  examined,  as  clofely  and  often,  as  any  body  plcafed,  about 

theii- 


(     6j     ) 

their  language.  It  would  have  been  no  great  trouble,  to  have  Chan.  XIJ, 
made  fo  much  acquaintance,  as  to  brmg  them  to  conveife,  with 
variety  of  people,  and  by  means  of  comparifon,  have  attained 
fome  degree  of  certainty.  This  founds  plaufiblc,  but  on  a  clofer 
examination,  the  cafe  is  very  different.  First  it  is  not  fo  eafy, 
as  people  may  imagine,  to  gain  much  information  from  the 
Gipfies,  concerning  their  language.  They  are  fufpicious,  ap- 
prehending it  might  be  dangerous  to  themfelves,  were  they  to 
explain  it :  which  makes  it  not  fo  prafticable  to  come  to  the  know- 
ledge of  what  you  want.  To  this  mufh  be  added,  that  great  levity 
prevents  their  ever  being  attentive  to  the  queftioos  pvit  to  them. 
A  writer,  who  had  frequent  experience  of  it,  expreffes  himfelf 
to  the  following  effed:.  "  Suppofe  any  perfon  had  an  inclination 
"  to  learn  the  Gipfey  language,  it  would  be  a  very  difficult  matter 
"  to  accomplilh  his  purpofe.  The  intercourfe,  with  thefe  people, 
"  is  almoft  infufferable,  and  very  few  of  them  have  fenfe  enough 
"  to  teach  any  thing,  or  to  give  a  proper  anfwer  to  a  queftion. 
"  If  you  afk  about  a  fmgle  word,  they  chatter  a  great  many, 
"  which  nobody  (lo)  can  make  fenfe  of;  others  have  equally 
"  failed  of  fuccefs,  not  being  able,  with  all  the  pains  they  could 
"  take,  to  get  from  them  the  pater  noflier  (ii)  in  their  own 
"  language."  Secondly,  fuppofe  the  language  of  the  Gipfies 
had  been  perfedly  underftood,  foon  after  their  arrival  in  Europe, 
that  would  not  have  prevented  the  variety  of  opinions,  among  the 
learned.  It  would  flill  have  been  neceffary,  in  order  to  come  at 
the  truth,  to  have  revifed  the  original  languages,  of  all  the 
inhabitants  both  in  and  out  of  Europe,  or  at  leaft  a  general  fketch 
of  them.     By  fuch  a  review,  the  Gipfies  mother  tongue  might 

eafily 


(     64     ) 

Chap.  XIL  eafily  have  been  difcovered.  But  many  there  are,  as  Biittner, 
Schlozer,  Gibelin  and  Bachmeiller,  who  have  taken  great  pains, 
in  the  minute  inveftigation  of  the  languages,  as  well  as  manners 
of  different  people,  and  count,  thofe  they  have  learned,  by  dozens. 
How  was  it,  indeed,  poffible,  for  the  learned  of  former  centuries, 
to  be  competent  to  the  enquiry,  as  they  had  not  the  aids,  which 
now  fo  copioufly  occur  to  the  hiftorical  etymologill.  Many 
dialefts  have  been  difcovered,  and  our  knowledge  of  others  greatly 
Increafed,  within  thefe  fifty  years.  During  that  term,  the  treafures 
of  the  fartheft  north  have  been  opened,  and  the  moft  eaftern 
idioms  become  more  familiar  to  us :  we  even  know  how  the 
Otaheitian  exprefles  himfelf.  All  this  did  not  exift  before  ;  the 
knowledge,  in  this  fcience,  was  much  more  confined,  than  now'; 
nor  was  it  in  the  nature  of  things,  for  the  mofi;  learned  man,  fo 
circumftanced,  to  point  out  the  country  in  which  the  Gipfey 
language  was  fpoken. 

The  Gipfies  have  no  writing,  peculiar  to  them,  in  which  to 
exprefs  their  language.  (12)  Writing  or  reading  are,  In  general, 
very  uncommon  accomplifliments  with  any  of  them,  nor  muft  they 
be  at  all  expefted  among  the  wandering  fort.  Sciences,  and  the 
refined  arts,  are  not  even  to  be  thought  of,  amongft  people,  whofe 
manner  of  living  and  education  are  fo  rough.  Twifs  does,  indeed, 
mention,  that  the  Spanlfli  Gipfies  have  fome  knowledge  of  medi- 
cine and  furgery ;  but  woe  betide  the  perfon  who  confides  In  their 
ikill.  It  is  abfurd  to  believe,  that  they  have  any  fecret  for  extin- 
guifhing  fire  :  fuperftition  formerly  gave  the  Jews  credit  for  this 
art,  in  procefs  of  time,  the  Gipfies  alfo,  were  (14)  gifted  with  it. 
Mufic  is  the  only  fcience  in  which  the  Gipfies  participate.  In  any 

conliderable 


(    65     ) 

confiderable  degree ;   they  compofe  likewife,  but  it  is  after  the     Chap.  XH. 
manner  of  the  Eaftern  people,  extempore.    In  Wallachia,  no  other 
people  poffefs  this  talent,  and,  like  the  Italian  improvilatori,  they 
always  accompany  their  verfes  with  linging  and  mufic.     The  quality 
of  the  poetry  of  thefe  ready  compofers,  may  be  known,  by  the  cir- 
cumftance,  of  the  rhyme  being  the  part  moft  confidered  ;  in  order 
to    accomplifli    this,     they    are    frequently    guilty  of    the   moft 
glaring  folecifms  in  grammar,  befides,  the  common  train  qf  their 
ideas  is  of  the  moft  obfcene  kind,  thefe  too  they  exprefs  in  the      ; 
grofs  ftile  of  rude  unpolilhed  people.     It  is  not  neceffary,  therefore, 
to  be  a  great  mafter,  a  Wieland,  to  hold  their  art  in  the  greateft 
contempt.    (15) 

CHAPTER       XIII. 

Charaaer    and    capacities    of    the    Gipfies ;     whether    they    are    am 
advantage   or    detriment    to    a  Jlate. 

Imagine  people  of  a  childhh  way  of  thinking;  their  minds 
filled  with  raw,  undigefted  conceptions;  guided  more  by  fenfe 
than  reafon;  ufmg  underftanding  and  refleftion  fo  far  only  as 
they  promote  the  gratification  of  any  particular  appetite ;  and  you 
have  a  perfeft  Iketch  of  the  Gipfies  charader. 

They  are  lively,  uncommonly  loquacious  and  chattering  ;  fickle 
in  the  extreme,  confequently  inconftant  in  their  purfuits,  faithleis 
to  every  body,  even  their  (i)  own  caft;  void  of  the  leaft  emotion 
of  gratitude,  frequently  rewarding  benefits  with  the  moft  infidious 

]^  malice. 


(     66     ) 

Quip.  Xin.  malice.  (2)  Fear  makes  them  flaviflily  (3)  compliant  when  under 
fubjeclion,  but  having  nothing  to  apprehend,  like  other  timorous 
■people,  they  are  cruel.  (4)  Defire  of  revenge  often  caufes  them 
to  take  the  moft  defperate  (5)  refolutions.  To  iuch  a  degree  of 
violence  is  their  fury  fometimes  excited,  that  a  mother  has  been 
known,  in  the  excefs  of  paflion,  to  take  her  fmall  infant  by  the 
feet,  and  therewith  ftrike  the  objeft  (6)  of  her  anger,  when  no 
other  inftrument  has  readily  prefented  itfelf.  They  are  fo  addided 
to  drinking,  as  to  facrifice  what  is  moft  neceffary  to  them,  that 
they  may  feaft  tlieir  paJate  with  fpirits.  (7)  They  have  too,  what 
■one  would  little  expect,  an  enormous  fhare  of  (8)  vanity,  which 
fhews  itfelf  in  their  fondnefs  for  fine  cloaths,  and  their  gait  and 
deportment  when  dreffed  in  them.  One  might  imagine,  that  this 
pride  would  have  the  good  effeft,  to  render  a  Gipfey  cautious, 
not  to  be  guilty  of  fuch  crimes  as  fubjeft  him  to  public  fliame ; 
but  here  comes  in  the  levity  of  charafter,  for  he  never  looks  to 
the  right  nor  to  the  left  in  his  tranfacfllons.  In  an  hours  time  he 
forgets  that  he  is  juft  untied  from  the  whipping  (9)  poft.  But 
their  pride  is  grovmded  on  mere  triviality,  as  appears  plainly  from 
their  making  it  a  point  of  honor,  to  abufe  their  companions,  and 
pvTt  on  a  terrible  appearance,  in  the  public  market,  where  they 
are  fure  to  have  many  fpeftators,  they  cry  out,  make  a  violent 
noife,  challenge  their  adverfary  to  fight,  but  very  feldom  any 
thing  comes  (10)  of  it.  Thus  the  Gipfey  feeks  honor,  of  which 
his  ideas  coincide  very  little  with  thofe  of  other  people,  fometimes 
deviate  entirely  from  propriety  ;  Therefore,  I  fhall  not  be  guilty 
of- any  contradiftion,  in  now  aflerting,  what  everyone,  w'-o  has 
jnade  obfervations  on  thefe  people  agrees  in,  viz.  that  honor  or 

fhame 


'      ,    C    67    ) 

fliame  are  indifferent  to  them.     This  decifion  holds  good,    if  we     Chap.  XIII. 
compare  Gipfey  notions  with  our  own  ;     trying  their  dealings  and 
condudl  by  this  ftandard,    they  will  often  appear  ridiculus,  fre- 
quently even  infamous. 

Nothing  can  exceed  the  unreftrained  depravity  of  manners, 
exifting  among  thefe  people,  I  allude  particularly  to  the  other  fex. 
Unchecked  by  any  idea  of  fhame,  they  give  way  to  every  defire. 
The  mother  endeavors,  by  the  moft  fcandalous  arts,  to  train  her 
daughter  for  an  offering  to  fenfuality,  and  this  is  fcarce  grown  up, 
before  flie  becomes  the  feducer  of  others.  Let  the  dance,  formerly 
mentioned,  be  called  to  mind,  it  will  then  be  unneceffary  to  adduce 
frefli  examples,  which  my  regard  for  decency  oblige  me  to  omit. 

Their  hidolence  has  been  quoted  before.  Lazinefs  is  fo  pre- 
valent among  them,  that  were  they  to  fubfift  by  their  own  labor 
only,  they  would  hardly  have  bread  for  two  of  the  feven  days, 
in  the  week.  This  indolence  increafes  their  propenfity  to  flealing 
and  cheating,  the  common  attendants  on  idlenefs.  They  feck 
and  avail  themfelves  of  every  opportunity,  to  fatisfy  their  lawlefs 
defires.  This  has  not  grown  upon  the  latter  Gipfies,  by  degrees, 
in  oppofition  to  the  practice  of  thofe  who  firft  arrived^  Thomallus 
does  indeed  endeavour  to  propagate  ( 1 1 )  fuch  a  notion,  quoting 
Stumpffor  his  authority  ;  who  talks  of  Chriftian  difcipline  and 
order  among  the  original  Giphes,  he  afTures  us  too  that  they 
paid  (12)  ready  money  for  all  they  wanted ;  but  this  teftimony 
does  not  deferve  attention  :  the  Gipfies  in  Stumpf 's  time,  were 
the  fame  as  they  are  at  this  (13)  day,  nor  are  differently  defcribed 
by  any  of  the  old  writers.  (14) 

K  z  This. 


(     68     ) 

Chap.  XIII.  This  is  a  tolerable  lift  of  evil  and  minous  properties  in  the 
'Gipfies  charadler,  which  applies  nor  only  to  a  few  individuals, 
but  to  by  far  the  greateft  number  of  thefe  people.  I  fcarce  know 
how  to  name  any  virtue,  that  could  exift  in  a  foul  fo  replete  with 
vices.  What  at  firft  fight  appears  leaft  cenfurable,  or  perhaps  even 
amiable  in  them  is,  their  conftant  content  in  their  fituation. 
They  have  no  care  about  futurity,  they  are  unacquainted  either 
with  anxiety  ■  or  folicitude,  and  go  through  every  day  lively 
and  fatisfied.  But  this,  in  itfelf,  commendable  refignation,  is  as 
little  to  be  accounted  virtue,  among  the  Gipfies  as  among  the 
Iroquois,  and  proceeds  from  the  exceffive  levity  of  their  dil- 
pofitions. 

Let  us  now  take  a  glance  at  the  natural  qualities,  and  capacities 
•  of  the  Gipfies.  Here  they  will  appear  in  a  favorable  point  of  view. 
It  does  not  require  much  obfervation  to  be  convinced  of  it. 
Take  them  at  whatever  employment  you  will,  there  always  appear 
fparks  of  genius.  It  is  well  known,  and  no  writer  omits  to  remark, 
with  what  artful  curious  devices  they  know  how  to  perpetrate 
any  cheat  or  robbery  ;  but  this  is  not  the  only  particular,  wherein 
they  fhew  brains  and  capacity.  The  following  words,  of  an  Hun- 
garian author,  who  was  a  nice  obferver  of  thefe  people,  contain 
many  other  inftances  of  them. 

"  Thefe  people,"  he  fays,  "  have  a  fertile  imagination,  in 
"  their  way,  are  quick  and  ready  at  expedients,  fo  that  in  many 
"  ferious  dubious  cafes,  they  foon  recoUeft  how  to  aifl  in  order 
"  to  extricate  themfelves.  One  cannot,  indeed,  help  wondering, 
•"  when  one  attends  to  and  confiders,  the  fkill  they  exert  in 
^'  preparing  and  bringing  their  works  io  (15)  perfection,  which 


(     69     ) 

"  is  more  neccflary,  from  the  fcarcity  and  want  of  proper  tools  ..Chap.  XllL 

"  and  apparatus.     They  are  very  acute  and  cunnuig,  in  cheating 

"  or  thieving ;    and  when  called   to  account,    for   any  fraud  or 

"  robbery,  fruitful  and  perfuafive  in  their  inventions  to  defend 

"  themfelves.  "  ' 

At  Debrezin,  as  well  as  at  other  fchools  in  Hungary  and  Tran- 
filvania,    there  have   been   feveral    lads  admitted  for    inftruftion, 
they  have  at  this  time  a  Gipfey  boy  in  the  Evangelical  fchool  at — 
Clevernefs  is  obfervable  in  all,  and  no  defpicable  talents  for  (i6) 
ftudy.     If  another  proof  (hould  be  wanting,    let  us  advert  to  their 
ikill  in  mufic.     That  no  Gipfey  has  ever  fignalized  himfelf  in  any 
branch  of  fcience^    notwithftanding,    according   to  the  foregoing 
accounts,    many    of    them  have    and    ftlU    do     partake     of    the 
inftrudion  to  be  difpenfed  at  public  fchools,    is   no  contradidion 
to  the  point   in  queftion.      Their    volatile   difpofition     and    un- 
fteadinefs  do    not    allow    them    to    cempleat    any    thing,   which 
requires    perfeverance  or  application.      Frequently   the    bud   dies 
before  it  blows,  or  if  they  proceed  fo  far  that  young  fruit  appears, 
it  commonly  falls  off  and  rots,  before   it   comes   to  maturity-     In 
the  midft  of  his  career  of  learning,   the  recoUeftion  of  his  origin 
feizes  him,    a  defire   arifes  to  return  to,  what  he  thinks,    a  more 
happy  manner  of  life,  this  increafes,  he  gives  up  all  at  once,  turns 
back  again,  and   configns  over  his  knowledge  to  (17)   oblivion. 
Such  is  the  caufe,    why  the  Gipfey  race  has  never    produced  a 
learned  man,  nor  ever  w  ill  as  long  as  they  retain  thefe  principles. 

Nobody  will  be  able  eafily  to  prove,  that  the  Gipfies  are 
deficient  in  capacity,  nor  that  they  have  not  throughout  a  wicked 
depraved  turn  of  mind.      The  former  might  render  them  very 

profitable 


(     70     ) 

Chap.  XIII.^    profitable  fubjefts  to  the  ftace,   but  the  latter  makes  them  the  mofs 
ufelefs  pernicious  beings.     They   are  not   fit  for  agriculture,   nop 
any  other  art  which  requires  induftry ;    on  the  contrary,  they  aro 
burthenfome  from  their  begging,  they  do  mifchief  by  their  variouj 
impofitions,   bclides,  being  thieves  and  robbers,  the)'  deflroy  tho 
fecurity  of  a   ftate.     The  goldwafhers,    in   Tranfilvania   ^nd    the 
Banat,   are  the   only  confiderable   exceptions;     thefe  Gipfies  are 
efteemed  the  heft  of  the  caft,  they  have  no  intercourfe  with  thofe 
of  their  own  nation,    nor  do  they  like  to  be  called  Gipfies,  but 
Brafchen,  and  in  the  Hungarian  language  Aranyafz  ( gold  colleftors). 
Their  employment  is  not  profitable,  wherefore  they  are  generally- 
poor  and  neceflitous,  yet  feldom  beg,  it  is  ftill  more  rare  for  them 
to  fteak     Content  with  their  fcanty  fubfiftanee,   they  fift  gold  fand 
in  fummer,  in  winter  they  make  trays  and  throughs,   which  they 
fell  in  an  honeft   (i8)  way.      Thefe   properties   render  them,   not 
only    harmlefs,    but    ufeful    to,    government ;     as    they    annually 
produce  large  fums,   Vv'hich,    but  for  them,    would   remain  in  the 
earth.       What  pity   it    is,    that   fo  fmall   a  part    ihould    be  well 
inclined,    in   proportion  to   the  multitude,    in  Tranfilvania   and 
elfewhere,  who  live  in  the  manner  above  defcribed.     There  remains 
perhaps  one  more  line,  in  which  a  ftate  might  reap  advantage  from 
the  Gipfies,  viz.  enlifting  them  for  foldiers.     They  feem  to  doubt 
of  this  in  Spain,  as  no  Gipfey  there,   even  were  he  fo  inclined, 
can    become  (19)   a    foldier.     In  other   countries  people   think 
differently.     For  example  in  the  two  Hungarian  regiments,    the 
Eflerhafifli  (now  Orofailh)  and    the  Julaifh,  nearly  every  eighth 
man  is  a  Gipfey.     In  order  to  prevent  either  them,  or  any  othei; 
perfon  from  remembring  their  defcent,  it  k  ordered  by  government^, 

that 


(     7^     ) 

that  as  foon  as  any  of  them  join  the  regiment,  he  is  no  longer  to  Chap.  Xill. 
be  called  a  Gipfey.  Here  he  is  placed,  promifcuoufly  with  other 
men,  and  by  fuch  a  wife  regulation,  may  be  fyftematically  rendered 
ufefiil.  But  whether  he  would  be  adequate  to  a  foldier's  ftation, 
unmixed  with  ftrangers,  in  the  company  of  his  equals  only,  is 
very  dubious.  His  healthy  robuft  body,  aftive  on  every  occafion, 
at  the  fame  time  fo  inured  to  hardfliip,  that  he  can  defy  hunger, 
ihirft,  heat,  cold,  and  other  inconveniencies,  make  him  uncom- 
monly qualified  for  a  military  life  :  on  the  other  hand,  his 
remaining  properties  feem  to  be  incompatible  with  his  profeffion, 
and  contain  but  few  of  the  requifites  for  a  ferviceable  foldier. 
How  could  a  regiment,  compofed  of  people,  without  heart  or 
courage,  who  would  be  overcome  with  fear  and  difmay,  on  the 
leaft  appearance  of  danger,  would  give  up  every  thing,  and  only 
think  of  faving  themleves  by  flight,  ever  perform  any  great 
action  ?  Or  how  could  one  expeft  from  their  levity,  and  un- 
fpeakable  want  of  forefight,  that  they  (liould  avail  themfelves,  to 
the  utmofl  of  any  advantage  with  proper  precaution  and  judgement. 
The  following  incident,  taken  from  the  Hungarian  annals,  may 
ferve  as  proof,  whether  this  fufpicion  be  well  founded  or  no. 
In  the  year  1557,  during  the  troubles  in  Zapoly,  the  caflle 
of  Nagy  Ida,  in  the  county  of  Abauywar,  was  in  danger  of  being 
befieged  and  taken,  by  the  Imperial  troops.  Francis  von  Perenyi, 
who  had  the  command,  being  fliort  of  men,  was  obliged  to  have 
recourfe  to  the  Gipfies,  of  whom  he  colleftcd  a  thoufand,  thefe  he 
furniflied  w  ith  proper  means  of  defence,  and  ftationed  them  in  the 
outworks,  keeping  his  own  fmall  compliment  of  men  to  garrifon 
the  citadel.     The  Gipfies  imagined,  that  nobodv  could  anoy  them 

behind 


C   r-    ) 

Cli?'P.  XIII.  behind  iheir  entrenchments,  therefore  went  courageoufly  to  their- 
pofts.  Every  thing  was  in  order  when  the  enemy  arrived,  and  the 
ftorm  commenced.  The  Blacks,  behind  their  fortifications,  fup- 
ported  the  attack  with  fo  much  more  refolution  than  was  expefted, 
returning  the  enemy's  fire  with  fuch  alacrity,  that  they  fufpedled 
nothing  lefs  than  a  fwarm  of  Gipffes  to  be  the  defendants,  and 
were  aftually  retreating.  They  had  hardly  quitted  their  ground, 
when  thefe  conquerors,  elated  with  joy  on  their  viftory,  crept 
out  of  their  holes,  crying  after  them,  '•'  go  and  be  hanged, 
*'  you  rafcals,  thank  God  we  had  no  more  powder  and  (hot, 
"  or  we  would  have  played  the  very  Devil  with  you,  nor  have 
"  fufFered  a  foul  to  efcape."  "  Ha!  ha!"  replied  the  retiring 
befiegers,  as  they  turned  about,  and,  to  their  great  aftonifhment, 
inflead  of  regular  troops,  difcovered  a  motley  Gipfey  tribe, 
"  Are  you  the  heroes  ?  is  it  fo  with  you  ?"  immediately 
wheeling  about  to  the  left,  fword  in  hand,  they  drove  the  black 
crew  back  to  their  works,  forced  their  way  after,  and  in  a  few 
minutes  totally  fubdued  them  (20).  Thus  the  affair  ended.  In 
this  manner  Gipfies  would  frequently  trifle  away,  by  heedleffnefs, 
what  they  might  have  gained  by  good  fortune  and  alacrity,  if  they 
were  permitted  to  aft  in  feparate  corps. 

There  are  many  inftances,  in  the  annals  of  former  centuries, 
where  Gipfies  have  been  employed  in  military  expeditions ;  but 
i'eldom,  or  rather  never  that  they  were  thought  of  as  foldiers. 
At  Cnipa,  in  1565,  they  prepared  cannon  balls  for  the  (21) 
Turks:  ftill  earlier,  in  1496,  they  ferved  Sigifmund,  Bilhop  of 
Fiinfkirchen  for  the  fame  purpofe.  (22)  In  the  thirty  years  war, 
the  Swedes  likewife  had  a  body  of  Gipfies  in  their  (23)    array. 

And 


(     73     ) 

And  when  Hamburg  was  befieged  by  the  Dunes,  in  1686,  there  Chap.  Xllr. 
were  three  companies  of  them  againfl;  it.  Their  deftination  was 
not  lo  much  to  Hand  to  their  arms,  as  to  perform  other  (24) 
fervices;  they  were  chiefly  employed  in  flying  parties,  to  burn, 
pkinder,  or  lay  wafte  the  (25)  enemies  country.  As  thefe  are  the 
operations  moll  fuitable  to  their  genius,  they  are  now,  by  the 
Turks  deftined  to  fuch  purpofes,  and  incorporated  with  the  Sains, 
Serdenjefl:i,  and  Nephers.    (26) 

Thefe  are  the  ufes  which  have  hitherto  been  made  of  the  Gipfies 
in  war ;  from  whence  we  experience  the  poflibility  of  their  being 
rendered  ferviceable,  although  the  ftricl  watch,  neceflTary  to  be 
kept  over  them,  on  account  of  their  propenfity  to  be  guilty  of 
exceffes  and  irregularities,  would  be  troublefome. 

But  in  order  to  bring  the  advantages,  and  difadvantages,  attend- 
ing them,   to  a  fair  difcufllon,  it  mud  not  be  forgotten,  that,  at 
the  very  time  one  part  of  thefe  people  might  be  moft  beneficial? 
viz.  in  time  of  war ;   another  part   have   it  in  their  power  to  do 
more  mifchief ;    by   reafon  of  the  diforder  which  then  prevails, 
when  the  relaxed  attention  of  the  magiflrates,  makes  them  more 
daring  in  their  robberies.     Befides,  what  is  the  worft  of  all,  they 
are  very  convenient  for  the  enemy  to  ufe  as  machines  for  their 
treachery.    What  they  were  accuftomed  to  praftice  very  commonly, 
at  l?aft  formerly,  they  flill  continue  to  carry  on,  whenever  they 
they  have  an  opportunity,  as  their  difpofition  is  what  it  ever  was. 
They    have    been  generally  decried,    in    early  times,  as  traitors 
(27)  and  fpies :  perhaps  this  accufation  may  be  extended  too  far, 
but  it  is  not  totally  without  foundation.     A  Gipfey  poflTefTes  all 
the  properties  required  to  render  him  a  fit  agent  to  be  employed 


(    74     ) 

Chap,  XIII.  In  trakerous  undertakings.  He  is  eafily  won  over,  becaufe  he  h 
neceffitous,  alfo  his  mifconceived  ambition  and  pride,  perfuade 
him  that  he  becomes  a  perfon  of  eonfequence  ;  he  docs  not  refieft 
on  danger,  becaufe  he  is  too  inconfiderate,  and  works  his  way 
under  difficult  circumftances,  as  he  is  artful  to  the  greateft 
degree. 

This  accufation  may  be  proved,  by  more  than  one  example. 
Count  Eberhard  of  Wirtemberg,  made  a  pilgrimage  into  Palef- 
tine  in  the  year  1468,  with  a  train  of  forty  people;  and,  as 
Crusius  (28)  fays,  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Sultan  of  Egypt, 
through  the  treachery  of  the  Gipfies.  Further,  during  the  troubles 
excited  by  John  Zapolya,  in  Hungary,  in  the  fixteenth  century, 
fundry  fpies  and  delegated  incendaries  were  taken,  which  proved 
to  Jje  Gipfies.  (29)  In  1602  Count  Bast  a,  the  Imperial 
General,  who  befieged  the  city  of  Biftritz,  in  Tranfilvania,  when 
he  wanted  to  circulate  a  letter  among  the  befieged,  effefted  it  by 
means  of  a  Gipfey.    (30) 

Sometimes  they  were  dangerous  to  a  country,  by  harbouring 
other  fpies,  who,  iinder  the  difguife  of  Gipfies,  made  excurfions, 
furveying  cities  and  countries,  without  being  noticed.  An  example 
of  this  kind  is  recited,  in  the  adventures  of  a  certain  French 
engineer,  Peter  Durois,  which  is  a  circumftance,  in  the 
records  of  Louis  XIV.  perhaps  as  much  unknown  as  it  i/  re- 
markable. It  relates,  that  at  Padock  (Patak)  in  Upper  Hungary, 
a  great  fire  happened,  through  the  careleflhefs  of  the  Gipfies ; 
by  which  not  only  the  little  city  adjoining  the  fort  was  burnt, 
i)ut  the  beautiful  Bruderhoff  was  alfo  reduced  to  aflies :  for  which 
.feven  Gipfies  were  felzed ;  among  them  a  French  engineer,  Peter 

Durois, 


r  75  )• 

rJi'Rois,  was  taken  into  cuftody.  This  perfon  had  travelled  Chap.  XIIL 
about  with  them  nine  years ;  he  had  fkctches  (31)  of  all  the  great 
fortifications,  in  the  whole  Roman  Empire,  and  the  Imperial 
hereditary  dominions,  in  the  moft  concife  manner,  with  remarks 
where  each  place  was  lead  defenfible.  This  affair  has  ftill  another 
voucher,  who  fays,  in  the  month  of  June,  of  the  year  1676,  the 
Gipfies  fired  this  little  city  (Patak)  together  with  the  church. 
Among  thefe  Gipfies  was  found  a  French  engineer,  named  Peter 
DuRois,  who  had  been  nine  years  with  them,  and  received 
confiderable  remittances  from  France.  He  was  taken  by  the- 
Imperialifts,  and  there  were  found  upon  him,  (3  2)  plans  of  almoft 
all  the  cities  of  Upper  Hungary,  and  the  German  Empire. 

Thus  thefe  people  caufe  much  damage  and  mifchief,  with, 
little  or  no  profit,  take  them  in  whatever  point  of  view  you 
will. 


CHAPTER       XIV. 

Concerning    their    being    tolerated    by    a  Jlatc. 

X^  ROM  the  uncommonly  bad  and  pernicious  qualities  of  the 
Gipfies,  the  queftion  arifes,  what  a  government  can  do  with  them. 
It  is  already  a  long  time,  fince  people  have  ferioufly  taken  into 
confideration,  the  evil  they  oecafion,  and  how  means  my  be  devifed 
to  fecure  themfelves  againft  it.  As  banifhment  was  very  much  in 
vogue  formerly,  nothing  could  be  more  natural,  than  that 
it  fhould  likewife  be  exercifed  againft  the  Gipfies.     Not  only  the 

L  2  clergy 


(     76     ) 

Chap.  XIV.  clergy  (i)  and  politicians,  (2)  inveighed  ftrongly,  againft  the 
toleration  of  thefe  people,  but  their  exile  was  actually  refolved 
upon,   in  moft  of  the  countries  of  Europe. 

About  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  tentury  Spain  made  the 
beginning.  King  Ferdinand,  who  efteemed  it  a  good  work 
to  (3)  expatriate  ufeful  and  profitable  fubjefts,  could  much  lefs 
be  guilty  of  any  impropriety,  in  laying  hands  on  the  mifchievous 
progeny  of  the  Gipfies.  The  edift  for  their  extermination  came 
out  (4)  in  the  year  1492.  Inftead  of  paffing  the  boundaries, 
they  flunk  into  hiding  places,  and  Ihortly  after  appeared  every 
where,  in  as  great  numbers  as  before.  The  Emperor  Charles  V. 
perfecuted  them  afreili,  as  did  Philip  II.  alfo.  (5)  But  fince 
that  time  they  have  nellled  in  again,  and  been  left  to  them- 
felves  till  very  lately,  when,  vinder  the  prefent  King,  they  were 
threatened  with  another  ftorm ;  but  it  blew  over,  without  taking 
effeft.    (6) 

In  France,  Francis  I.  paffed  an  edift  for  their  expulfion; 
(7)  and  at  the  aflembly  of  the  States  of  Orleans,  in  1561, 
all  o-overnors  of  cities,  received  orders  to  drive  them  away,  (8) 
with  fire  and  fword.  Neverthelefs,  in  procefs  of  time,  they  had 
collefted  again,  and  increafed  to  fuch  a  degree,  that  in  16 12,  a 
new  order  came  out  for  their  extermination.  (9) 

In  Italy,  their  fituation  has  been  equally  precarious.  In  the 
year  1572,  they  were  compelled  to  retire  from  the  territories  of 
Milan  (10)  and  Parma,  and  fomething  earlier  they  were 
chafed  beyond  the  Venetian  (i  i)  jurifdidion. 

England  firft  endeavored  to  difburthen  itfelf  of  them,  in  the 
year    ic;^i,   under    Henry    VIII.    but   as   the  ad,    palled,    for 

that 


(     77     ) 
that  purpofe,  fell  into  difregard,  a  new  (12)  one  came  out  under     Chap.  XI\'. 
Elizabeth. 

They  were  not  allowed  the  privilege  of  remaining  unmolefted 
in  Denmark,  as  the  code  of  Danilli  laws  Ipecifies.  The 
Tatars  (Gipfies)  who  wander  about  every  where,  doing  great 
damage  to  the  people,  by  their  lies,  thefts,  and  witchcraft,  Ihall 
be  taken  (13)   into  cuftody,  by  every  magiftrate. 

Sweden  has  not  been  more  favorable,  having,  at  three  different 
times,  attacked  them.  A  very  iharp  order,  for  their  expullion, 
came  out  in  the  year  1662.  The  Diet,  of  1723,  publillied  a 
fecond  :  and  that  of  1727,  repeated  the  foregoing,  with  additional 
(14)  feverity. 

They  were  excluded  from  the  Netherlands,  under  pain  of 
death,  partly  by  Charles  V.  and  partly  afterwards  by  the 
United  Provinces  in  1582.  (15) 

Finally,  the  greateft  number  of  fentences  of  exile,  have  been 

pronounced    againft   them,    in  Germany.        As    well    Imperial 

decrees,  as  thofe  of  particular  Princes,  have  been  repeatedly  iffued, 

for  removing  thefe    people.      The   beginning  was   made,    under 

Maximilian    I.  at  the  Augsburg  Diet,  in  1500:     where  the 

following  article  was  drawn  up  on  this  bufinefs.     "  Rcfpefting 

"  thofe  people,  who  call  themfelves  Gipfies,  roving  up  and  down 

"  the   country.       By  public  edift,     to  all  ranks  of  the  empire, 

"  according  to  the  obligations,  under  which  they  are  bound,    to 

"  us  and  the  Holy  Empire ;  it  is  flrictly  ordered,  that  in  future 

"  they  do  not  permit  the  faid  Gipfies  ;     (fince  there  is  authentic 

"  evidence  of  their  being  fpies,   fcouts,   and  conveyers  of  intelli- 

"  gence,     betraying  the  Chriftians   to   the  Turks,  )    to  pafs  or 

"  remain 


(     7-8^    ) 

Chap.  XIV.  "remain  within  their  territories,  nor  to  trade  or  traffic ;  neither- 
"  to  grant  them  proteftion  nor  convoy.  And  that  the  faid  Glpfies- 
*f  do  withdraw  themfelves,  before  Eafter  next  enfuing,  from  the 
"  German  dominions,  entirely  quit  them^  nor  fuffer  themfelves. 
"  to  be  found  therein.  As  in  cafe  they  fliould  tranfgrefs,  after 
'^  that  time,  and  receive  injury  from  any  perfon,  they  fhall  have- 
"  no  redrefs,  nor  Ihall  fuch  perfon  be  thought  to  have  committed; 
"  any  crime."  The  fame  affair  occupied  the  Diet  in  1530... 
7544  . .  .  48  .  . .  51  and  was  alfo.  again  enforced^  in  the. improved, 
police  regulation  (16)  of  Frankfort  in  1577. 

Several  princes  were  fo  little  attentive  to  thefe  orders  of  the 
Empire,  that,  inflead  of  endeavouring  to  drive  out  the  Gipfies,., 
ihey  on  the  other  hand,  furniflied  them  with  paffports  (17)  and 
fafe  condufts  :  others  on  the  contrary,  and  by  far  the  greateft 
number,  exerted  themfelves  to  the  utmofl,  to  clear- th^ir  Rates  of- 
tliis  vermin,  and  fome  ftill  continue  the  fame  watchfulnefs. 

From  hence  it  ap^^ears,  how  univerfally  the  opinion  was  adopted, 
that  banilhing  the  Gipfies,  was  the  only  method  to  be  fecure  from 
their  malignity.  Perhaps,  there  is  not  one  civilized  ftate,  Hun- 
gary (18)  and, Tranfilvania  excepted,  where  this  remedy  has  not 
been  tried  :  but  whether  it  be  as  expedient,  as  it  has  been  hitherto-, 
general,  is  much  to  be  doubted. 

In  thi  FiKsi:  place,  it  had  very  little  effeft,  and  that  little  was . 
only  temporary.     Even  if  every  civilized  nation  had  driven  the  ■ 
Gipfies  from  them,  at  the  fame  time,  Europe  could  not  have  been 
entirely  cleared  of  them,   fo  long  as  they  preferved  an  afylum  in 
Turkey,  and  that  they  would  have  done,  fince  Ofman  tolerates 
every  nation  in  his  dominions.     Now  as  experience  evinces,  there 

is 


{     79     ) 

is  no  country,  in  which  a  conftant  equal  attention  is  paid  to  the     Chap.  XIV- 

execution  of  the  laws,  they  would,   in  more   or  lefs  time,  have 

infinuated    themfelvcs    again,    inro   the    neighbouring  countries ; 

from  thefe  into  others,  and  recommenced  where  they  had  left  off. 

But  this  never  did  happen,  for  the  laws,  for  banifliing  them,  pafled 

in  one  ilate,  before  it  was  ever  thought  of  in  the  next ;     or  when 

a  like  order  had  long  become  obfolete  and  fallen  into  oblivion. 

Thefe  defirable  guefts  were,  therefore,   difpatched  into  that  land, 

where  they  remained,   till  government  began  again  to  clear  them 

away  ;     upon  which  the  fugitives  either  retired  back,  from  whencfc 

they  came,    oT  went  on  progreflively,    to  a  third  place :     thus 

making  an  everlafting  revolution. 

Secondly,  this  remedy  was  premature  ;  endeavouring  to 
e'xterminate  was  the  fame  thing,  as  if  a  furgeon  flrould  proceed 
diredlLy  to  the  amputation  of  a  difeafed  limb,  becaufe  it  created 
inconvenience  to  the  reft  of  the  body.  Whereas  the  firft  enquiry 
fliould  be,  whether  the  diforder  were  of  fuch  a  nature,  as  not  to 
be  removed  but  by  entire  reparation.  This  is  a  defperate  remedy^ 
which  Ihould  only  be  adopted,  when  no  other  can  be  efficacious. 
Had  the  Gipfies,  hitherto,  occafioned  never  fb  much  mifchief, 
it  was  no  impoflible  thing,  that  they  might  ceafe  to  be  fuch  per- 
nicious beings.  At  leaft  there  had  never  been  any  trial  made,- 
from  which  this  impoffibility  could  be  afcertained.  Men  may  be 
formed  to  any  thing.  Had  proper  means  been  Xjfed,  for  their  im- 
provement, the  event  would  have  proved,  that  they  were  not 
incapable  of  becoming  better.  If  feveral  at  different  times,  have 
of  themfelves,  emerged  from  their  favagenefs,  how  much  more 
likely  is  it,   that  the  remainder  might  have  been  altered,   had  they 

received 


(     So     ) 

Chap.  X|fIV.  received  fuch  aids,  as  their  neceffities  required.  But  it  was  not 
merely  a  premature  ftep,  to  expell  the  Gipfies  intireljf.  It  was, 
Thirdly,  a  wafteful  one.  This  may  perhaps  found  odd,  but 
is  certainly  indifputable,  as  long  as  the  Hate  maxim  holds  good, 
that  an  increafed  population  is  more  advantageous  than  a  fmaller 
one,  which  is  in  ibme  degree  a  confequence  of  the  laft  mentioned 
circumftance.  It  is  allowed,  that  a  ftate  would  not  lofe  any  thing 
by  the  Gipfies,  as  Gipfies  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  would  be  a  gainer, 
becaufe  an  obftacle  to  the  general  welfare  would  be  removed  ;  but 
this  is  not  the  matter  in  q\ieftion.  Every  man  has  taxes  to  pay, 
and  powers  to  exert,  the  Gipfies  none  of  the  leaft  ;  if  he  does 
not  know  how  to  make  ufe  of  them,  let  the  date  teach  him,  and 
keep  liim  in  leading  firings  till  the  end  is  attained.  If  the  root 
of  tlvs  depravity  lies  lo  deep,  in  the  hrft  generation,  that  it 
cannot  be  removed  immediately,  a  continuation  of  the  fame  care 
will,  in  the  fecond  or  third  defcent,  be  fure  of  meeting  its  reward. 
Now  let  us  refleft  on  a  Gipfey,  when  he  has  difcontinued  his 
Gipfey  life,  confider  him  with  his  fecundity  and  numerous  family, 
who  being  reformed,  are  made  vifeful  citizens,  and  we  fliall 
perceive  how  great  want  of  oeconomy  it  was  to  throw  him  away 
as  drofs. 

Pretty  near  the  fame  idea  has  ftruck  other  authors ;  at  leaft 
tliey  fo  far  agree,  in  what  has  been  advanced,  that  they  advife 
making  the  Gipfies  ufeful  in  fome  way  :  only  the  means  they 
recommend  have  powerful  objeftions  to  them.  They  think  the 
ftate  might  make  public  Haves,  or  penitentiaries,  of  thefe  people, 
and  fet  them  (19)  to  all  kinds  of  work.  But  fuch  dependants, 
even  fuppofing  them  to  be  employed  in  the  moft  beneficial  way, 

ate 


(     Sr     ) 

are  always  a  nuifance  and  burdien  to  a  (late.     Befides,  in  the  above     Chap.  XIV. 

fcheme,  there  is  no  propofal  made  for  the  bettering  thefc  people, 

fo  they  muft  either  be  fulTered  to  wear  out,    or  remain  under  the 

conflraint  of  convicts,    from  generation  to  generation.     The  firfl 

fliould  not  be  permitted,  becaulc  when  they  were  extindt,  they 

could  render  no  further  fervice   to  the   community.     They  muft 

therefore  be  allowed  to  increafe.     But  what  could  be  done  at  laft 

with   this    multitude  and  their   brood?       Would    it   not   lequirc 

whole  diftrids,  and  large  cities  to  be  built,    merely  to  turn  the 

thoufands  of  thefe  wretches  into.     Moreover    what  an  expence, 

and  inconvenience  to  fuperintend  them.    As  plaulible,  therefore,  as 

that  propofal  appears  at  the  firft  glance,  as  little  will  it  ftand  the 

teft  of  a  clofer  examination. 

Therefore  banifliment  was  not  the  proper  method  to  be  adopted, 
nor  would  it  have  been  advifeable,  to  make  them  penitentiaries  or 
galley  flaves ;  but  care  fliould  have  been  taken,  to  enlighten  their 
underftandings,   and  to  mend  their  hearts. 

But  what  has  been  omitted  formerly,  there  is  ftill  time  enough 
to  execute.  Few,  or  almoft  none  of  the  larger  ftates,  are  fo 
entirely  cleared  of  Gipfies,  that  they  may  not  here  and  there  be 
found  by  hundreds,  in  moft  countries  by  thoufands.  The  times, 
when  the  firft  fentences  of  banifliment  were  pronounced,  were  too 
unphilofophical,  for  any  thing  preferable  to  be  fuggefted  ;  but 
it  may  be  expefted,  from  a  more  informed  age,  to  adopt  better 
maxims.  We  fend  ApoflJes  to  the  Eaft  and  Weft,  into  the  moft 
diftant  parts  of  the  Earth;  and,  as  will  be  fliewn  below,  into  the 
very  country,  to  the  brethren  of  the  Gipfies,  in  order  to  inftrud: 
the  people  who  know  not  God.     Is  it  not  inconfiftertt,  for  men 

M  to 


(        82        ) 

Chap.  XIV.  to  be  foUicitous  for  thofe  who  are  without,  and  to  throw  off  and  ■ 
leave  to  chance  thofe,  who,  equally  wretched,  have  brought  their 
errors  home  to  us.  If  it  be  a  good  work,  to  teach  religion  and 
virtue,  to  fuch  as  are  ignorant  of  their  Creator,  why  not  begin 
with  thofe  neareft  to  us  :  efpecially  as  negleft,  in  this  particular, 
is  attended  with  detriment  to  fociety  in  general.  They  have  been 
long  enough  among  civilized  people,  to  prove,  that  they  will 
not  be  allured,  by  the  mere  example  of  others,  to  free  them- 
fclves  from  the  (20)  fetters  of  old  cuftoms  and  vices.  In  order 
to  accomplifli  that,  foreign  and  more  effeftual  help  is  requifite. 
It  were  in  vain  to  hope  for  any  confiderable  progrefs,  from  thofe 
who  are  grown  up,  it  would  be  fufficient  by  compulfion,  to  make 
them  quit  their  unfettled  manner  of  life,  by  inftruftion  and 
teaching,  to  convey  a  glimmering  of  light  to  their  underftandings, 
and  endeavour  at  fome  melioration  of  the  heart.  Proper  care 
being  taken  of  the  education  of  the  children,  fociety  would  be 
more  likely  to  have  its  endeavors  crowned  with  fuccefs. 


CHAPTER      XV. 

Ejfay  on    their    improvement. 

XT  would  be  a  lamentable  cafe,  if  fuch  regulations  were  only 
pious  wilhes.  Let  us  hope  fomething  better  !  the  work  is  already- 
begun,  a  great  Emprefs,  Therefa,  has  laid  the  plan,  to  win  over 
thefe  poor  unfortunate  people,  to  virtue  and  the  ftate.  It  is  only 
great  pity,  that  the  execution  of  her  wife  difpofitions,  refpefting 

the 


(     83     ) 

tlie  GIpllcs  In  Hungary,    feems  to  have  been  entrufted  to  people     Chap.  XV- 
inadequate  to  the  tafk. 

What  was  done,  in  her  time,  towards  the  accomplifhing  this 
work,  may  be  feen  by  the  following  article,  in  the  Ncwfpaper 
already  often  quoted,  called,  Anzeigen  aus  den  Kayferl.  Konlgl. 
Erblandern,  (Intelligence  from  the  Hereditary  Imperial  Royal 
Dominions).  "  Since  the  year  1768,  feveral  decrees,  rep-ardinp- 
thefe  people  have  been  publiflied,  In  the  country  (Hungary),  and 
the  ilriclcfl  orders  difpatched  to  the  feveral  diftrlfts.  In  confequcnce. 
They  were  prohibited  from  dwelling  In  huts  or  tents ;  from 
wandering  up  and  dowa  the  country  ;  from  dealing  in  horfes ; 
from  eating  animals  which  died  of  themfelves,  and  carrion  ;  and 
from  ele<5ling  their  own  Wayda  or  Judge.  It  was  intended  to 
extirpate  the  very  name  and  language  of  thefe  folks,  out  of  the 
country.  They  were  no  longer  to  be  called  GIpfies,  but  New 
Boors  (Uj  Magyar),  not  to  converfe  any  longer  with  each  other 
in  their  own  language,  but  in  that  of  any  of  the  countries  in 
which  they  chufe  to  refide.  Some  months  were  to  be  allowed, 
after  which  time  they  were  to  quit  their  Gipfcy  manner  of  life, 
and  fettle,  like  the  other  inhabitants,   in  cities  or  villages ;    to  ' 

build  decent  houfes,  and  follow  fome  reputable  bufinefs.  They 
were  to  procure  Boors  cloathing,  to  commit  themfelves  to  the 
protedtlon  of  fome  territorial  fuperior,  and  live  regularly.  Such 
as  were  fit  for  Soldiers,  to  be  enllfted  Into  the  regiments." 
Neverthelefs  lb  apparently  as  thefe  regulations  were  calculated, 
entirely  for  the  good  of  thefe  people  and  the  ftate  ;  jufl;  as  little 
were  the  greateft  part  benefited  by  them.  The  fmall  effeft  which 
was  produced,  gave  occalion.   In  the  year  1773,  for  thefe  orders 

M  z  not 


C     S4     ) 

Chap,  XV.  not  only  to  be  repeated,  but  made  more  rigid  ;  and  when  even 
this  would  not  anfsver  the  end,  it  became  neceffary  to  pro- 
ceed to  extremity,  with  them.  Wherefore  it  was  ordered, 
that  no  Gipfey  fliovild  have  permiffion  to  marry,  who  could  not 
prove  himfelf  in  condition,  to  provide  for  and  maintain  a  wife 
and  children.  That  from  fuch  Gipfies  who  were  married  and  had 
families,  the  children  fliould  be  taken  away,  by  force,  removed 
from  their  parents,  relations,  or  intercourfe  with  the  Gipfey  race, 
to  have  a  better  education  given  them.  A  beginning  was  made, 
in  fome  (i)  places,  and  where  they  would  not  comply  voluntarily, 
they  were  compelled  to  fubmit  to  the  decree.  At  Fahlendorf,  in 
Schiitt,  and  in  the  diftrid  of  Prefsburg,  all  the  children  of  the 
New  Boors  (Gipfies)  above  five  years  old,  were  carried  away  in 
waggons,  in  the' night  of  the  twenty-firft  of  December  1773, 
by  overfeers  appointed  for  that  purpofe ;  in  order,  that,  at  a 
diftance  from  their  parents  or  relations,  they  might  be  more 
ufefuUy  educated,  and  become  accuftomed  to  work.  Thofe  Boors 
who  are  willing  to  receive  and  bring  up  thefe  children,  are  paid 
eighteen  guilders  yearly  from  Government.  On  the  24th  of 
April  1774,  between  five  and  fix  o'clock  in  the  morning,  the 
children  of  the  Gipfies,  which  had  been  growing  up,  from 
December  of  the  foregoing  year,  were  again  removed  from 
Fahlendorf  in  Schiitt  and  Hideghid,  for  the  purpofe  of  being  put 
\mder  the  fame  courfe  of  difcipline  as  the  others.  Among  the 
former  was  a  girl  fourteen  years  old,  who  was  forced  to  fubmit  to 
be  carried  off  in  her  bridal  ftate.  She  tore  her  hair  for  grief  and 
rage,  and  was  quite  befide  herfelf  with  agitation  :     but  (he  has 

now 


•      ;  (  85  ) 

now   (1776)    recovered  a   compofed   ftate  of  mind,   having,    'hi     Chap.  XV. 
Fafching,  obtained  permiflion  to  accomplilh  her  marriage. 

So  far  our  intelligence  quoted  from  the  Gazettes ;  from  whence 
we  may  fee,  how  prudently  every  thing  was  concerted.  It  is  true, 
the  means  here  made  ufe  of  are  compulfory,  but  neceffary,  and 
the  only  ones  capable  of  infuring  fuccefs.  Moreover,  it  may  at 
the  fame  time  be  obfervcd,  although  the  publifher  of  this  infor- 
mation endeavours  to  conceal  it,  how  little  thefe  falutarv  regu-  .  . 
lations  were  put  in  force,  there  were  fcarcely  two  places  in  the 
kingdom,  where  it  was  even  endeavored  to  give  them  proper 
eifeft.  This  fupinenefs  muft  have  been  unknown  to  the  great 
Jofeph,  or  he  would  certainly  have  enforced  them  afredi,  to  all 
chiefs  and  governors,  at  the  fame  time,  that  he  gave  orders  for 
their  being  obferved  in  Tranfilvania. 

This,  more  late  decree  of  the  Emperor's,  which  came  out  laft 
year,  means,  as  was  the  intention  of  Therefa,  with  the  Hungarian 
Gipfies,  that  thofe  alfo  in  Tranfilvania  fliould  become  better  men, 
and  more  ufeful  inhabitants.  For  which  reafon,  it  prohibits  their 
wandering  about  and  living  under  tents ;  requires  that  they  (hall 
become  fettled,  and  put  themfelves  under  fome  territorial  chief. 
In  order  to  ftrike  at  the  root  of  the  evil,  neceffary  and  minute 
diredlions  are  given,  for  the  improvement  of  their  religious  ideas 
and  opinions  together  with  their  lives  as  citizens.  (2) 

First,  with   refpeft   to    religion,     they  muft 

1.     Not  only  be  taught  the  principles  of  religion,  themfelves,  but 
fend  their  children  early  to  fchool. 

^  2.    Pre: 


(     86     ) 

Chap.  XVo  2.  Prevent,  as  much  as  poffible,  their  children  from  running 
about  naked,  in  the  houfe,  the  roads,  and  ftreets,  thereby 
giving  offence  and  difguft,  to  other  people. 

3.  In  their  dwellings,   not  permit  their  children  to   fleep  pro- 

mifcuoufly  by  each  other,  without  diftinftion  of  fex. 

4.  Diligently   attend  at   church,    particularly   on    Sundays   and 

holidays,   to  give  proof  of  their  Chriftian  difpofition. 

5.  Put  themfelves  under  the  guidance  of  fpiritual  teachers,  and 

condufl;  themfelves  conformably  to   the  rules  laid  down  by 
them. 

Secondly,   with   refpeft    to    their   temporal   condud   and 
better    mode    of    living,    they    are     bound 

I,  To  conform  to  the  cuftom  of  the  country,  in  diet,  drefs, 
and  language  :  confequently  to  abftain  from  feeding  on  cattle, 
which  have  died  of  diftempers ;  not  to  go  about  in  fuch 
unfeemly  dreffes ;  and  to  difcontinue  the  ufe  of  their  own 
particular  language. 

z.  Not  to  appear  any  more  in  large  cloaks,  which  are  chiefly 
ufeful,  to  hide  things  that  have  been  ftolen. 

3.  No  Gipfey,  except  he  be  a  goldwafher,  fball  keep  an  horfe, 
alfo  the  goldwafhers 

4.     Muft 


(     87     ) 

4-     Mufl  refrain  from  all  kinds  of  bartering  at  the  nnnual  fairs.  Chap.  XV. 

5.  The  Magiftrates,  of  every  place  muft  be  very  attentive,  that 
no  Gipfey  wafle  his  time  in  idlenefs ;  but  at  thofe  feafons, 
when  they  have  no  employment  either  for  themfelves,  or 
any  landholder,  recommend  them  to  fome  other  perfon^ 
with  whom  they  (hall  be  compelled  to  work  for  hire, 

6.  They  are  to  be  kept,  particularly,  to  agriculture ;  therefore 

7.  It  is  to  be  attended  to,  where  poflible,  that  every  Territorial 

Lord,   who  takes  any  Gipfies  under  his  jurifdiftion,  do  allot 
them  a  certain  piece  of  ground  to  cultivate. 

8.  Whoever    is    remifs,    in   his   hufbandry,    fliall   be  liable   to 

corporal   punilhment. 

9.  They    fhall    only   be  permitted    to   amufe    themfelves    with 

mufic,  and   other  things,  when  there  is  no  field  work  to  be 
done. 

Thefe  regulations  will,  probably,  be  attended  with  the  moft 
efficacious  confequences,  as  Jofeph's  eye  is  too  watchful,  to  fuffer 
any  thing,  he  has  planned  to  remain  unexecuted.  Should  his 
undertaking  fucceed,  and  he  (hould,  moreover,  revive  this  bufinefs, 
with  good  effedl  in  Hungary,   where  it  feems  to  have  fallen  into 

oblivion  - 


C    «8     ) 

Chap.  XVe  oblivion ;  it  will  be  an  additional  jewel  in  his  crown,  nor  will  it 
be  the  laft  among  his  other  atchievements,  tranfmitted  to  pofterity, 
that  upwards  of  eighty  thoufand  miferable  wretches,  ignorant 
of  God  and  virtue,  deep  funk  in  vice  and  brutality,  like 
only  half  men,  wandering  in  error,  were  by  him  drawn  out 
of  their  delufion,  converted  to  human  creatures,  and  made  good 
citizens. 


APPENDIX. 


(    h    ) 
APPENDIX. 


Letter  from  a  noble  Hungarian  Lady,  on  the  fubjed.  of  the  Gipjies' 

in    Hungary.    ( i ) 

A  READ  the  Paper  called,  News  from  all  the  Imperial,  Royal 
Hereditary  Dominions :  for  as  I  live  in  the  country,  where,  befidcs 
my  own  domeftick  affairs,  I  have  no  employment  but  reading  and 
writing  ;  I  receive  partic\ilar  fatisfadion  from  thefe  fheets,  as  they 
fiipply  matter  for  inveftigation,  for  refledtion,  and  alfo  for  practice. 
You  know  I  have  only  one  daughter,  you  are  alfo  not  ignorant, 
that  I  educate  other  young  ladies  of  q\iality,  and  keep  them  with 
me  till  they  marry.  In  order  that,  in  addition  to  domeftic 
ccconomy,  they  may  acquire  fome  general  knowledge,  it  is  my 
cuftom  to  keep  a  fort  of  fchool,  that  they  may  not  mifapply  their 
capacity  for  improvement  ;  but,  as  much  as  poffibie  turn  it  to 
the  greateft  (2)  advantage.  Among  other  things,  we  are  now 
difcufiing  the  narrative  in  your  paper,  about  the  Gipfies.  There 
are  a  great  number  of  them,  on  my  eftates,  but  I  have  permitted 
two  families  in  particular,  to  eftablifli  themfelves  at  the  place  of 
of  my  own  refidence,  under  the  exprefs  condition,  that  no  others 
fhall  come  here  and  join  them.  I  took  all  poffibie  pains,  to  make 
them  reafonable  creatures.  I  fet  the  elder  ones  to  work ;  the 
younger  ones  tend  the  cattle.  I  obferved  that  they  were  more 
fond  of  horfes,  than  any  thing  elfe  ;   for  which  reafon  I  placed  a 

N  Gipfey 


(     9°     ) 

Appendix.  Gipfey  under  each  groom.  I  had  their  children  cloathed,  that, 
none  of  them  might  be  running  about  naked,  according  to  their 
'ufual  praflice.  It  appeared,  however,  that  cuftom  was  become 
nature  with  them.  The  old  ones  worked  diligently,  fo  long  as 
any  body  flood  over  them ;  the  moment  their  back  was  turned, 
they  got  all  together  in  a  circle,  their  legs  acrofs,  facing  the  fun, 
and  chattered.  Thus  they  cannot  poffibly  earn  more,  indeed 
hardly  fo  much,  as  would  find  them  bread,  although  very  cheap 
v/ith  us ;  for  the  bread  I  give  them  does  not  ftand  me  in  half  a 
kreutzer  the  pound.  Even  in  winter  they  cannot  bear  a  hat  on 
their  head,  nor  fliocs  on  their  feet.  The  boys  run  like  wild 
things,  wherever  they  are  fent,  either  on  foot  or  on  horfeback ; 
but  they  fpoil  horfes  unmercifully,  beat  them  on  the  head,  jerk 
the  bits  in  their  mouths,  fo  as  to  make  them  nin  down  with 
blood.  They  cannot  be  brought,  by  any  means  whatever,  to 
drefs  horfes.  Cloath  them  as  you  will,  they  always  fell  or  lofe 
their  cloaths.  In  a  word,  one  cannot  but  confider  them  as  void 
of  reafon  ;  it  is  really  fhocking  to  fee  even  well  grown  children,  put 
whatever  they  find  into  their  mouths,  like  infants  before  they  can 
fpeak ;  wherefore  they  eat  every  thing,  even  carrion,  let  it  ftink 
never  fo  much.  Where  a  mortality  happens  among  the  cattle, 
there  thefe  wretched  beings  are  to  be  found,  in  the  greateft 
numbers.  This  winter,  I  was  fo  unfortunate  as  to  have  an  infecflion 
among  my  hogs ;  immediately,  inftead  of  my  two  families,  I  had 
ten,  infomuch  that  I  was  forced  to  drive  them  away ;  fearing 
they  would  rob  me,  that  being  their  chief  occupation.  I  fometimes 
ftand  by  them,  for  an  hour  together,  and  enquire  'concerning 
their  religion.     They  profefs  to  be  Roman  Catholicks,   but  know 

nothing 


C    9t     ) 

aothing  of  the  matter.     I  afked  them,  if  they  knew  there  is  a     Appendix. 
God  ?   They  faid  yes.     How  they  knew  it  ?  I  perceived,    by  their 
confufed  anfsvers,  that  according  to  the  Apoftle  Paul,   in  the  firft 
chapter  of  his  Epiftle  to  the  Romans,   they  know  the  Creator, 
from  feeing  tlie  things  created.     I  firft  afked  if  they  love  him  ? 
As  their  anfv/er  feemed  to  indicate,  that  they  more  fear  than  love 
him,  I  enquired,  Whether  they  had  not  fufficient  proofs  of  his 
goodnefs  ?  They  then  anfwered,  becaufe  he  killed  them  :  for  they 
are  extremely  afraid  of  death.     It  would  take  up  much  time,  to 
convey  to  them  an  idea  of  a  life  to  come,  I   therefore  declined 
the  attempt,  and  only  endeavoured  to  convince  them,  that  when, 
with   advanced   age,   nature  became  weak,   and  the  ftrength   im- 
paired, a  good  death  was  one  of  the  greateft  benefits  God  could 
confer  upon  mankind.     They  burft  into  a  general  laugh,  faying, 
what  they  had  was  fomething,  but  when  they  died  all  was  gone.. 
From  whence  we  may  infer  how  ignorant  they  are.     It  would  be 
a  bleffing  to  them,   if  they  had  human,  rational  principles.     As 
they  are,  their  great  neceffity  makes  them  thieves,  robbers,  and 
liars.     Their  mode  of  life  is  downright  brutifh ;  their  marriases 
are  not  holy,  and  in  general,  the  accounts  lately  publiflied,  make 
it  appear,  that  even  the  Hottentos  poffefs  more  religion,  than  we 
find  among  thefe  poor  people.     It  is  true  that  orders  come  from 
the  Royal  Office,    concerning  them,    but  they  pafs  unobferved. 
They  are  driven  from  one  place  to  another,  without  being  allowed 
a  chance  of  getting  a  maintenance,  or  making  provifion  for  the 
better  education  of  their  children.     This  does  not  concern  me ; 
but  excites  compafilon  when  I  refleft  on  it. 

-  '  N  2  I  have 


<     9^     ) 

Appendix.  I  have  compared  their  language  with  the  Gazettes,  but  thai 
fpoken  by  my  Gipfies  is  different,  and  bears  more  refemblance  to 
the  Latin.  They  call  God,  Di  . . .  bread-pan  . . .  water-apa.  This 
feems  to  be  corrupt  Latin,  and  they  have  many  more  fuch  words. 
'  They  mix  Sclavonian  and  Hungarian  words  with  their  own,  but 
give  them  quite  a  different  fignification. 

H.  C. 

■g-  V.  J, 

ai.  April,  1776. 


Tind     of    the     FIRST    PART. 


Diflertation    on     the    Gipsies, 


SECTION  II. 

On     the     Origin     of     the     Gipsies. 

CHAPTER       I. 

The  firjl  Appearance  of  Gipfies  in  Europe. 

J.T  is  no  where  recorded,  in  what  year,  or  in  what  part  of 
Europe,  Gipfies  made  their  firfl  appearance.  But  it  is  to  be 
premifed,  what  will  afterwards  be  inveftigated,  that  they  did  not 
originate  in  our  quarter  of  the  World  ;  on  the  contrary,  that 
they  ftrayed  hither,  as  Oriental  fhangers,  either  from  Egypt, 
Asia  Minor,  or  fome  other  part:  we  fhall  then  examine, 
whether  it  may  not  be  poffible,  by  means  of  what  is  related,  in 
old  \\ritings,  concerning  the  difcovery  of  them,  in  different 
countries,  to  follow  the  track  fo  far,  as  to  make  out,  where  and. 
when  they  firfl:  fet  foot  on  European  ground. 

Mention  is  made  of  them  in  Germany,  fo  early  as  the  year 
141 7,  when  they  appeared  in  the  vicinity  of  the  North  Sea.  (i) 
A  year  afterwards  we  find  them  alfo  in  Switzerland  and 
Graubundten.  (2)  In  1422  they  likewife  appeared  in  (3)  Italy. 
It  is  unknown  what  was  the  earlieft  period,  that  they  were  obferved 

in 


(     94     ) 

Chap.  I.  in  France  and  Spain:  but  their  appearance,  in  thefe  countries 
muft  have  been  of  later  date,  than  among  us,  as  is  proved  in 
refpedl  to  France,  by  the  name  Bohemians,  which  they  bear 
there:  in  regard  to  Spain,  Cordova,  in  order  to  contradict 
fome  furmifes,  about  the  Gipfies  mother  country,  ufcs  the 
argument,  that  they  were  known  in  Germany  prior  (4)  to 
either  Spain  or  Italy.  The  French  make  the  firfl  mention 
of  them,  in  1427,  when  they  ftraggled  about  Paris,  having 
arrived  there  on  the  17th  day  of  Augufh  (5) 

From  what  country  did  they  come  into  Germany  ?  It  is 
MuRATORi's  opinion,  from  (6)  Italy  :  but  how  unfounded 
this  is,  appears  clearly  from  their  coming  to  that  country,  after 
they  had  been  in  Germany.  The  Bologna  Chronicle  afcertalns  the 
time,  when  Italy  became  acquainted  with  thefe  people.  The 
hord,  therein  mentioned,  which  arrived  in  that  city  on  the  1 8th 
of  July  1422,  confifted  of  about  an  hundred  men;  whofe  leader 
or  (as  they  called  him)  Duke's  name,  was  Andreas.  They 
travelled  from  Bologna  to  Forli,  intending  to  proceed  to  pay  the 
Pope  a  vifit  at  (7)  Rome.  Muratori  founds  his  judgement 
on  this  Chronicle,  not  knowing,  that  Gipfies  are  fpoken  of  in 
the  German  prints,  five  years  earlier. 

Still  lefs  tnie  is  what  Majolus  aflerts,  that  they  came  from 
Spain,  and  only  entered  (8)  the  German  territories  in  the  year 
1492,  when  they  were  driven  out  of  Spain,  by  Ferdinand  the 
Catholic.  Hungary  is  certainly  the  country  from  whence  they 
came  into  Germany.  Not  only  the  time  confirms  this  conjefture, 
as  we  find  them  (9)  in  Hungary  in  141 7,  the  very  fame  year, 
that  they  were  firfl  obferved  in  Germany,   but  Aventin  expreffly 

mentions 


(     95     ) 

^mentions  Hungary,  among  the  countries  from  which  he  Aippofes     Chap.  I. 
them   (lo)  ro  come. 

In  this  flate  our  examination  refts,  in  regard  to  whether  they 
appeared  earlier  in  fome  other  place,  or  arrived  here  firft. 

That  Poland  fliould  be  the  country  which  harboured  the  firft 
Gipfies,  and  that  they  fpread  from  thence  into  Wallachia,  Tran- 
filvania,  and  other  places,  is  a  mere  arbitary  furmife.  The  writer 
(ii)  who  is  of  this  opinion,  appeals  to  MiiiosTER's  intelligence, 
but  that  does  not  contain  a  fyllable  in  confirmation  of  it.  Others, 
with  the  greateft  confidence,  maintain,  that  Wallachia  and 
Moldavia,  where  they  alfo  wandered  about  in  141 7,  are  the  (12) 
places  in  which  they  made  their  firft  appearance  among  us.  Can- 
TEMiR,  on  the  contrary,  is  very  undecided  In  this  matter,  faying, 
"  From  whence,  or  at  what  time  this  nation  arrived  in' 
*'  Moldavia,  neither  do  they  know  themfelves,  nor  is  there  any 
*'  mention  made  of  it  in  our  annual  (13)  publications."  How- 
ever, the  fecond  opinion  fecms  to  approach  very  near  the  truth, 
but  does  not  point  out  the  particular  province,  in  which  the 
Gipfies  were  firft  obferved,  (and  of  what  ufe  would  that  be.)  But 
one  information,  compared  with  other  clrcumftances,  is  of  fo 
much  afliftance  here,  that  we  may,  without  hefitation,  pronounce 
Turkey  to  be  the  country,  from  v/hich  thefe  Eaftern  guefts 
found  their  way  to  us.  This  is  probable  .  .  .  First,  becaule 
AvENTiN  expreflly  makes  Turkey  their  original  place  of  rendez- 
vous. Secondly,  as  this  explains  why  the  fouth  eaft  parts  of 
Europe  are  moft  crouded  with  Gipfies,  as  was  aflTerted  in  the 
beginning  of  the  other  ( 1 4)  part.  What  they  did  in  every  other 
place,   happened  likewife  in  Turkey,   viz.  many  remained  behind, 

In 


(     96     ) 

Chap.  I.  in  every  country  they  pafled  through.  Now  as  all  that  came 
to  Europe  pafled  by  here,  whether  at  once,  or  in  different 
divifions,  it  was  poflible,  indeed  a  neceflary  confequence,  that  a 
greater  number  fhould  remain  here,  than  in  the  different  countries, 
where  their  hords  were  much   divided  and  diminifhed. 

The  time  when  they  arrived,  has  been  as  little  certified,  as  the 
particular  place  where  they  landed.     Perhaps,  the  before  quoted 
Chronicle  of  Bologna,   may  give  us  fome  inlight  into  this  matter: 
It  relates,  as  appears  by  the  context,  from  the  mouth  of  the  leader 
of  the  hord  which  it  defcribes ;  that  thefe  people,  at  the  time  of 
their  arrival  at  Bologna,  had  been  five  years  wandering  (15)  about 
in  the  world.     Now,  if  this  account   is  to  be  depended  on,  they 
cannot  have  arrived   in  Europe  earlier  than  the  year  141  7.     But, 
in  order  for   this  relation  to  be  believed,  it  is   principally  to  be 
confidered,  whether  the  author  of  it  be  deferving  of  credit.     To 
place  any  confidence  in  Gipfey  narrations  in  general,  would  be 
nothing  lefs  than  prudent ;    as  there  are   too   many  proofs,  that 
their  fayings  are  mere  nonlenfe,  and  contradiftory  prattle  :   but  the 
cafe  in  queftion,  feems  to  be  an  exception.     All  the  ftuff  and  lies 
which   the   Gipfies  gave  out,   concerning  whence  they  came,  with 
the  reaibns  for  their  wandering,  have  an  end  in  view.     But  with 
regard  to  the  time,  if  he  knew,   he  is  more  to  be  trufted,  as  he 
could  not  perceive  any  injury  to   refult  from  a  mere  date.     Now 
tlie   inference  to  be  drawn  is,  that  the  leader  of  an  hord,   might, 
not  only  know  how  long  he  had  retired  from  Egypt,  or   Asia 
Minor,  and   travelled  about  in  Europe,  as   the   time  had  been- 
fliort ;  but   it  may  alfb  be  fuppofed,  that  he  laid  what  he  knew. 
In  the  mean  time,  we  will  compare  this  cited  term,  of  five  years,. 

with 


(     97     ) 

with  other  circumftanccs,  and  fee  whether  they  make  for,  or  Chap.  1. 
againft  our  argument.  The  firft  cafe  would  be,  whether  there 
are  any  earlier,  authentic,  accounts  of  their  appearance  in  Europe, 
than  141 7?  But  we  do  not  find  fuch  (16)  any  where.  The  fecond 
thing  to  be  enquired  is,  whether,  if  they  were  not  feen  towards 
the  Black  Sea,  before  1417,  they  could  in  one  year's  tinie  have 
reached  the  North  Sea.  This  doubt  is  a  very  trifling  one.  A 
year  was  quite  fufficient,  for  fuch  a  wandering  people,  who  never 
tarried  long  in  a  place,  to  have  migrated  even  far  beyond  where 
they  were  met  with.  And  then,  if  they  were  not  earlier  in 
Moldavia  and  Wallachia,  than  the  year  141 7,  yet  appeared 
the  fame  year  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  North  Sea ;  what  great 
difference  would  it  make,  if  they  came  from  a  provifice,  next 
beyond  Moldavia  or  Wallachia,  fo  on  that  account  travelled,  a 
few  miles  further,  tc  arrive  at  the  fame  place  ?  It  is  therefore  very 
credible,  that  141 7  was  the  rime  of  their  arrival. 

Although  immediately  after  their  coming  into  Germany,  they 
fpread  fo  rapidly,  that  in  141 8  their  names  were  (17)  recorded 
rn  the  annual  publications  of  almoft  every  part  of  it  ;  yet  par- 
ticular places  feem  to  have  been  favored  by  them.  Thus  in 
Bavaria  they  were  not  noticed  till  1433,  (18)  and  they  muft  have 
very  quickly  withdrawn  themfelves  again,  from  thefe  parts,  as, 
fix  years  afterwards,  it  was  remarked  as  fomewhat  new  and 
unheard  of,  that  in  this  year,  (1439)  the  Gipfies,  a  pack  of 
fcoundrels,  a  riff  raff  gang,  were  come  into  that  country,  with 
their  King,  whofe  name  was  Zundl.  (19.) 

They  did  not  travel  together,  but  in  different  hords,  each 
having    its   leader,    fometimes  called  Counts,    at    others   giving 

O  themfelves 


(     93     ) 

Chap,  I.  themfelves  out  for  Dukes  or  (20)  Kings  of  Lesser  Egypt.  One 
herd,  which  arrived  at  Augfburg  in  141 9,  although  it  conlifted  of 
only  feventy  men,  had  even  two  of  thefe  Dukes,  befides  fome 
Counts,  (21)  with  them.  But  what  foit  of  creatures,  thefe 
dignifyed  perfons  among  the  Gipfies  were,  has  been  explained  in 
another  (22)  place. 

If  Stumpf  is  right,  the  number  of  thefe  people  muft  have  been 
very  confiderable.  Thofe  alone,  who  came  into  Switzerland  in, 
3718,  women  and  children  included,  were  (23)  eftimated  at  14000. 
But  here,  he,  or  his  authorities,  feem  to  have  greatly  mifcounted. 
It  is  true,  that  he  likewife  remarks,  they  did  not  keep  all 
together,  but  went  about  in  feparate  parties ;  notwithftanding  this 
his  account  is  much  to  be  do\ibted.  By  what  I  can  find  concerning 
particular  hords,  there  were  none  which  exceeded  one  or  two  (24) 
hundred.  That  which  went  to  Augfburg  in  1419,  confifted  of 
only  feventy  men  :  therefore  if  they  had  been  as  abundant  as 
Stumpf  fays,  there  muft  have  been  at  leaft  an  hundred  fuch 
hords,  difperfed  through  Switzerland.  It  was  at  this  time,  141 8, 
that  Gipfies  were  firft  feen  at  Zurich,  they  were  a  fwarm  whofe 
leader's  name  was  Michael.  It  was  not  till  four  years  afterwards 
that  they  were  known  at  Bafil,  and  the  fame  fet,  being  no  other, 
than  the  very  hord  of  this  (25)  Michael.  Would  not  fome  other 
tribe  have  got  to  Bafil,  before  thefe,  if  they  had  been  fo  numerous? 
Thomasius  adopts  this  number  of  14000,  without  fufpicion,  and 
underftands  it  to  comprehend  the  whole  multitude,  all  over  (26) 
Germany  :  but  then  he  does  not  appear  to  have  quoted  Stumpf's 
teftimony  in  the  fenfe  it  was  meant.  There  muft  certainly  have 
been,  a  vaft  quantity  of  them  arrived,  as  they  fpread  every  where 

fa 


(     99     ) 

fo  prodigiovifly,  but  to  pcrfift   in  any  nearer  invefligation  of  their     Chap.  T. 
numbers,  would  be  only  trouble  thrown  away. 

Their  poflefTions  were,  as  at  prefent,  fmall,  and  their  whole 
arrangement  lingular,  befidcs  that,  according  to  the  Eaftern 
cuflom,  they  hung  cloths  about  them^  inftead  of  other  garments ; 
thefe  confifted  of  ragged  tatters.  Their  leader  only,  or  fome  of 
thofe,  above  the  common  rank,  who  would  be  Nobles,  or  even 
Counts  were  (27)  exceptions.  Several  had  hories,  aifes  or  mules 
with  them,  on  which  they  loaded  their  tents,  with  other  things, 
and  the  whole  family  into  the  bargain.  They  had  alio  dogs  in 
their  company,  with  which,  Kranz  afferts,  they  ufed  illegally 
to  kill  (28)  game  :  but  probably  the  dogs  were  not  fo  much 
intended  to  hunt  hares,   as  to  kill  fowls  and  geefe. 


•C  H  A  P  T  E  R       II. 

On  the  fanEi'tly,    pajfporls,    and   difference    of  the  former,   from  the 

latter  Gipjies. 

\T  was  the  fafhion,  foon  after  their  arrival,  to  believe  them 
Egyptians  and  pilgrims,  who  were  conftrained  to  wander  on  a 
religious  account.  This  miftake  originated  from  the  Gipfies  own 
relation  ;  but  on  giving  a  more  circumftantial  detail,  of  the  reafons 
for  their  pilgrimage,  they  varied  very  much  from  each  other. 
One  part  of  them  declared,  that  they  w^ere  compelled  to  make 
this  emigration,  as  an  atonement  for  their  forefathers  having,  for 
fome  time,   (1)   apoftatifcd  from  the  Chriftian  faith.     Others  gave 

O  2  out 


(      loo     ) 

Chap.  IL  out  that  the  King  of  Hungar}',  had  feized  their  country,  and  iii 
like  manner,  impofed  this  penance  of  wandering,  on  them,  h 
third  (2)  party  related,  that  God  had  fignifyed  to  them  the 
neceffity  of  this  pilgrimage,  by  univerfal  ilerility  in  their  country. 
The  caufe  of  this  vifitation,  was  on  account  of  the  fin  committed 
by  their  anceftors,  in  refufing  to  receive  the  infant  Jefus,  with  his 
Mother  and  Jofeph,  when  they  (3)  fled  to  Egypt,  as  an  afylum^ 
from  the  perfecution  of  Herod.  The  term  of  their  pilgrimage 
was  to  be  feven  years. 

There  is  no  need  of  any  evidence  to  determine  that  thefe  were 
mere  fables ;  and  it  is  matter  for  aftonidiment,  that  men  fhould 
be  found,  who  adduced  long  winded  proofs  of  the  origin  of  thefe 
people,  grounded  on  no  better  authority,  than  fuch  idle  tales. 
Although  we  have  not  now  any  polltive  grounds  remaining,  to 
ihew  how  thefe  legends  were  invented,  or  what  gave  rife  to  them  : 
the  real  truth,  which  lies  at  the  bottom  of  all  this,  feems  to  be 
merely,  that  upon  being  aJked,  from  whence  they  came,  they 
anfwered  from  Egypt ;  and  there  is  no  reafon  exifting,  to  deny 
their  having  come  from  thence.  Now  very  likely,  priefts,  monks, 
or  perhaps  other  people,  might  wonder  why  they  fhould  quit  fo  Holy 
a  country,  whither  formerly  the  Mother  of  God,  with  the  child 
Jefus,    and   Jofeph   had  fled    for   refuge,    unlefs  their  forefathers 

had  been  guilty  of  fome  tranfgreflion,  on  that  occafion,  and 

But  be  this  as  it  will  ;  all  that  could  be  faid,  with  regard  to  the 
erigin  of  their  legends,  would  be  only  mere  conjeftures,  and 
1  leave  every  body  at  liberty  to  form  ihofe  for  themfelves.  Let 
it  fuffice  to  fay,    they  chufe  to  be  looked   upon  every  where  as 

pilgrims. 


•  (       lOI       ) 

pilgrints,  and  they  met   with  more  ready  belief,   as  it  coincided     Chap.  IL 
with  the  infatuation  of  the  times. 

This  credulity,   with  which  people  gave   into   the  idea  that  th; 
Gipfies  were   real  pilgrims  and   holy    people,    was  attended  with 
the  confequence,    that  not  only  nobody  oppofed  them ;    but,  if 
the  information  on  this  head  may  be  depended  on,  every  body 
gave   them    affiftance,    with   exprefs   fafe    condufts.       Thefe    fiife 
condudls  are  mentioned  in  feveral  old  writings.     Munster  de- 
clares,   not  only  in  general  terms,    that  they  carried  about  with  < 
them,  paffports  and  feals,  from  the  Emperor  Sigifmund  and  other 
Princes,    by    means  of  which,    they   had    free    paflage,    through 
different  countries  and  cities  ;     but  that  he  had  himfelf,    feen  (4) 
an  attefted    copy  of    fuch    a  letter,    in    the   pofTeffion   of  fome 
Gipfies    at'  Eberbach.     Befides  Kranz,    Stumpf,  and  Guler; 
Laurentius  Palmirenus    (15)    alfo  agrees  in   this;     but    is 
guilty  of  a  miflake,   in  confounding  the  Emperor  Sigifmund   with 
Sigifmund  King  of  Poland.     The  Gipfies  at  Bologna,   likewife, 
flievved  an  inftrument   from  Sigifmund,  but  he  appears   to  have 
granted  this  to  them,  not  as  Emperor,  and  in  Germany,  but   in 
Hungary,    and  as   King  of  Hungary.    (6)      A  pafs   of  another 
King  of  Hungary,    Uladiflaus  II.    which  the  Gipfies  obtained, 
chiefly   on  account   of  their  fuppofcd  fanclity,    and    pilgrimage, 
might  be  quoted.     In  Tranhlvania,  they  were  not  deftitute,  if  it 
be  true,    that  they  received  this  fort   of    letters    of    proteftion, 
from  the  Princes  of  the  Houfe  of  Bathorv.  (7)     Wehner  faj^s, 
that   the  Gipfies  in  France,  likewife  quoted  ancient  privileges, 
granted    to    them    by   the    former   (8)    Kings   of  that  country. 
CR.USIUS,  WuRSTiSEN  and  Guler,  mention  papal  permiflions, 

which. 


(        I02       ) 

Chap.  II.  which  thefe  people  acquired,  for  wandering,  unmoleftcJ,  through 
all  Chriftian  countries,  as  long  as  the  time  of  their  pilgrimage 
lafted.     (9) 

This  is    what  we  find,    difperfed   here    and  there,    concerning 
the  privileges  and  pafles  of  the  Gipfies.     How  much  or  how  little 
are  we  to  give  credit  to  ?     Thomasius  believes  every  thing  (10) 
as  it  {lands.     Ahasuerus  Fritsch,    on  the  contrary,    declares 
it  all  to  be  lies,    and  the  Gipfies  own  (11)  invention.     It  certainly 
carries  a  very  equivocal  appearance,  as  none  of  thefe  inftruments, 
are  verbally  handed   dov,'n  to   us,    fo  that  they  can  be  properly 
proved  ;     except  that  of  Uladiflaus  II.  which  does  not  belong  to 
this  queftion.     Moreover,  it  has  been  frequently  experienced,  that 
the  Gipfies,  ufing  the  pretence  of  fuch  fafe  condufts,  have  com- 
mitted all  manner  of  exceffes,    and  when  compelled  to  produce 
them,  had  either  nothing  to   fliew,    or  fuch  kind   of  papers,    as 
did  not  at  all  refemble,    what  are  (12)  ufually  given  from  a  public 
office.     It  cannot  be  denied  they  have  pradiifed   deceit,   but  it  is 
impoffible  to  allert,    with  certainty,    that  the   whole   was  fallacy. 
If  the  contents  of  that  paflport,   to  be  found  in  Muratori,.  (13) 
is  conceived  in  fuch  terms   as   to   allow  the  hord,   which  pofleffed 
it,    to    wander  about    feven  years,    to  rob    or  Ileal  every  where, 
without    any  perfon    being  permitted  to  bring   them   to  juftice ; 
fuch   a  letter  feems  to  carry  falfehood,  on  the  very  face  of  it,   as 
no  fenfible  Prince  could  ever  2:rant   fuch   an  one.     But  what  fliall 
we  fay,  if  thefe  words  do  not   fo   much  convey  the  fenfe  of  the 
inftrument,    as  a  crafty  explanation  of  the  author,   on  recollefting 
the    many   irregularities,    praftifed   by  the   Gipfies,    who   availed 
themfelves  of  this  freedom,  to  travel  about  everywhere  unmolefted. 

Further, 


C    103    ) 

Further,  with  refpect  to  the  paffport,  which  Munster  perufed  Chap.  II, 
at  EuERBACH,  although  every  one  mufl  look  upon  the  reafons,. 
(14)  given  by  the  Gipfies,  for  their  emigration,  as  mere  fidions, 
yet  we  cannot  entirely  rejccSl  it.  ^Vhat  could  it  benefit  them, 
being  old,  and  having  loft  its  validity  many  years  ago  ?  ^Vhy  did 
not  the  hord  to  which  it  belonged  carry  with  them  fonie  writing, 
that  might  afford  them  prelent  protedion  ?  If  they  had  been 
guilty  of  any  knavery,  about  this  letter,  why  was  it  juft  of  that 
kind,  as  could  only  ferve,  incontrovertibly,  to  prove  they  were 
cheats  ?  Thefe  documents  would  certainly  not  have  been  found 
among  them,  had  they  not  been  tranfmitted,  from  their  parents 
and  anceftors,  as  things  of  value.  Suppofmg  this  matter  to  have 
been  invented  by  themfelves,  it  is  difficult  to  conceive,  why  they 
fhould  confine  their  privileges  to  feven  years,  and  not  rather  leave 
them  unlimittod.  But  there  are  other  proofs  of  the  authenticity 
of  fuch  letters.  The  firjl  is,  they  were  looked  upon  as  pilgrims, 
and  as  it  was  quite  conformable  to  the  cuftom  of  thofe  fuperftitious 
times,  to  grant  to  pilgrims,  as  Holy  People,  all  forts  of  paffes, 
and  fafe  conducts.  Secondly,  we  cannot  do  otherwife  than  believe, 
that  this  did  happen,  with  the  Gipfies,  when  we  read,  with  what 
chagrin,  Aventin  mentions  their  thefts  and  excelTes,  concluding 
thus.  "  Robbing  and  ftealing  are  prohibited  to  others,  under 
"  pain  of  hanging  or  beheading,  but  thefe  people  (15)  have 
"  licence  for  them."  When  Thirdly,  in  the  decree  of  the  Diet 
at  Augfburg  Anno  1 1^00,  all  ranks  of  people  in  the  Empire  are 
ftridlly  enjoined,  in  futui'e,  not  to  permit  the  people  called  Gipfies, 
to  travel  through  their  countries  and  diftridls,  nor  to  grant  them 
any  further    protedion    and   convoy,    it   certainly   implies    that 

people 


(      T04     ) 

Chap.  IL  people  had  formerly  granted  them  fuch  protection  and  convoy. 
Whoever  has  ftill  any  doubts  remainuig,  may  read,  Fourthly, 
in  a  decree  of  the  Empire,  of  fifty  years  later  date,  a  reg\ilar 
complaint,  preferred  on  account  of  the  paffports  granted  by  various 
Princes,  to  the  Gipfies,  and  whicii  are,  by  that  Diet,  declared 
to  be  null  and  (i6)  void.  All  this  taken  together,  will  not,  I 
believe,  allow  the  fliadow  of  a  doubt  to  remain,  that  fuch  letters 
•of  convoy,  had  really  been  gxanted  to  the  Gipfies. 

TheGipfies  golden  age  continued  a  confiderable  time,  but  at  laft, 
when  about  half  a  century  had  elapfed,  and  people  began  to  have  a 
watchful  eye  over  them,  the  old  prejudice  gave  way.  They  endea- 
voured to  prolong  the  term,  partly  by  giving  out,  that  their  return 
home  was  prevented,  by  foldiers,  ftationed  to  (17)  intercept 
them  :  partly  by  wiiliing  to  have  it  believed,  that  new  parties  of 
pilgrims  were  to  leave  their  country  every  year,  otherwife  their 
land  would  be  rendered  totally  (18)  barren.  All  this  was  of  no 
avail ;  people  faw  too  clearly,  that  inftead  of  Holy  Pilgrims,  they 
were  the  mere  refui'e  of  humanity ;  upon  which  followed  the 
fentences  of  banifhment,  that  have  been  mentioned  above. 

Before  I  proceed  to  other  matters,  I  muft  fay  a  few  words  about 
what  has  been  allerted  in  fome  writings,  that  the  later  Gipfies 
differed  very  widely  from  thofe  who  went  about  during  the  firft 
feven  years,  both  with  refpeft  to  their  conduci  and  defcent. 
Stumpf,  for  inftance,  and  others  after  him  relate,  that  thefe  firft 
Gipfies  obferved  very  decent,  Chriilian  order,  did  no  harm  to 
any  one,  but  paid  ready  money  for  Vihat  they  confumed  :  for 
which  purpofe  they  received  frefh  remittances  conftantly,  and  at 
the  expiration  of  feven  years  returned  home.     Afterwards  an  idle 

defpcrate 


(    '©5    ) 

defperate  crew  united,  who,   when  the  GIpfies  were  withdrawn,     Chap,  il, 
took  their  place,  and  by  blacking  their  faces,  at  the  fame  time 
iifmg  the  like  outlandifli  garments,  wanted  to  perfuade  the  world 
that  they   were  the  identical  Egyptians. 

This  is  all  related  with  fo  miich  appearance  of  veracity,  that, 
at  the  firft  view,  one  is  not  even  tempted  to  harbour  a  lufpicion ; 
wherefore  Thomasius  readily  adopted  the  whole  as  real,  and 
founded  his  whole  fyftem  about  the  Gipfies  upon  it :  whereas, 
upon  clofer  examination,  we  find,  there  is  not  a  fyllable  of  • 
truth  in  it. 

This  tranfaftion,  we  acknowledge,  is  recorded  in  four  different 
annual  (19)  publications,  but  all  the  four  amount  only  to  a  hngle 
teftimony,  which  refts  entirely  upon  Stump f,  from  whom  the 
other  three  have  drawn  their  aflertions :  it  therefore,  all  flows 
from  Stumpf's  fpring.  Let  it  remain,  as  Thomasius  will 
have  it,  (20)  an  old  manufcript  account  or  chronicle,  it  is  ftill 
evident,  that  the  favorable  defcription  of  the  ancient  Gipfies, 
originates  from  the  fame  prejudice,  as  firft  produced  their  pafT- 
ports.  And  even  thefe  pafTports  may  have  contributed  to  recom- 
mend the  name  of  the  firfl  Gipfies.  They  have  had  fo  much  effed; 
on  Thomasius,  that  all  the  good  he  has  given  the  abovemen- 
tioned  primitive  Gipfies  credit  for,  has  been  principally  owing 
to   them.    (21) 

When  Stvmpf,  or  rather  his  authority,  mentions  among  other 
circumftances,  that  the  earlier  Gipfies  received  remittances,  from 
time  to  time,  out  of  their  own  country ;  it  was  a  necefTary 
addition,  to  fupport  the  Editor's  opinion :  As  the  reader,  who 
was  to  believe,  that  thefe  people,  did  not  fteal,  but  paid  money 

P  for 


(     io6     ) 

Chap.  II.  for  every  thing,  would  have  wanted  faith,  had  he  not  been  affured 
beforehand,  where  the  money  came  from,  in  order  to  provide  for 
their  neceffities,  in  an  honeft  way,  during  the  term  of  feven  years. 
With  regard  to  the  latter  Gipfies,  they  were  certainly  lineal 
defcendants  from  the  former ;  who  were  undoubtedly  equally 
thieves,  cheats,  and  rafcals,  as  thefe.  (22)  The  falfe  uprightnefs 
and  honefty,  allowed  to  the  Giplies,  in  the  Manufcript  Chronicle, 
which  Stumpf  copied,  might,  even  before  Stump f's  time, 
induce  the  continuator  of  this  Chronicle  to  believe,  on  finding  his 
cotemporary  Gipfies  lived  in  a  very  different  way,  from  what  they 
had  formerly  the  credit  of  doing,  that  thefe  were  not  the  true 
Egyptians  :  and  becaufe  the  further  connexion  of  the  affair, 
according  to  his  imagination,  appeared  very  probable,  he  wrote 
down  his  furmife,  not  by  way  of  conjefture,  but  as  pofitive  tmth, 
and  Stumpf,  in  his  Annual  Regifler,  afterwards  quoted  it  as  fuch. 
Whoever  does  not  allow  this,  but  looks  upon  the  latter  Gipfies  in 
the  light  that  Stumpf  reprefents  them,  muft  be  ready  to  anfwer, 
when  called  upon  to  folve,  the  following  doubt.  How  was  it 
poffible,  that  a  colleftion  of  rafcals,  affembled  in  Europe,  fuppofing, 
that  in  refpeft  to  complexions  and  cloathing,  they  fliould  be  able 
to  transform  themfelves  into  real  Gipfies ;  could  at  once  acquire 
foreign  countenances,  fpeak  a  foreign  language,  and  both  in 
confLitution  and  turn  of  mind,  become  perfedly  Oriental,  contract 
a  :tafte  and  defire  for  carrion,  which  remains  with  them  to  this 
day.  It  cannot  be  denied  but  fome  depraved  people,  have 
affociated  themfelves  with  the  Gipfies,  (23)  fo  as  to  live  with 
them  :     but  I  cannot  allow,    that  particular  inftances    are  proof 

at  general  maxims^ 

CHAPTER 


(107) 

CHAPTER      III, 

Prefumed   origin   of  the    Gipjies. 

J.T  would  be  equally  ufelel's,  prolix  and  difgufting  to  reconfider 
the  multitude  of  conjeftures,  which  the  queflions,  "  What  race 
of  people  are  the  Gipfies  ?"  "  And  where  are  we  to  look  for 
their  true  mother  country?"  have  occafioned.  The  greateft  part  of 
them  are  of  fuch  a  nature,  that  they  only  require  to  be  heard,  to 
be  totally  rejefted.  I  muft  neverthelefs  produce  fome  as  examples, 
in  order  to  be  excufed  for  having  pafTed  over  the  reft  in  filence. 

People  have  tried  various  methods,  to  obtain  a  folution  of 
thefe  queries.  Some  adverted  to  this  or  that  name  only  of 
the  Gipfies,  without  attending  to  other  circumftances.  Becaufe 
they  were  likewife  called  Gipfies  (Cingani)  they  muft  imme- 
diately derive  from  the  Grecian  heretics,  called  (i)  Athin- 
gans ;  then  again  they  muft  have  wandered,  from  the  African 
Province,  formerly  called,  (2)  Zeugitana ;  Another  time  they 
are  fuppofed  to  be  the  fugitives,  driven  from  the  city  (3)  Singara, 
in  Mefopotamia,  by  Julian  the  Apoftate ;  others  again  tranf- 
planted  them  to  Mount  Caucafus,  and  made  them  (4)  Zochori,  or 
to  the  Palus  IVIcEotis,  making  them  (5)  defcendants  from  the  Ziches. 
Some  people  imagined,  that  inftead  of  Zigeuner,  they  ftiould  be 
called  Zigarener,  which  they  efteemed  a  corruption  of  Saracener, 
and  they  muft  certainly  be  (6)  Saracens.  Another  writer,  (to 
return  to  Africa)  condufts  them  from  the  Mauritanian  province 
Tingitane,  and  judges  them  to  be  the  Canaanites,  which,  being 

P  2  driven 


Chap.  III. 


(     io8     ) 

Chap.  III.  driven  out  by  Jolliua,  fettled  (7)  here.  Still  another  bring', 
them  from  Mauritania,  and  to  corroborate  his  opinion  by  the 
name,  calls  them  defcendants  of  Chus,  as  he  thinks  nothing  can 
have  a  greater  affinity  in  found,  than  Zigeuner  and  (8)  Chufener. 
Herbelot  takes  the  coafl  of  Zengebar  for  their  mother  (9) 
country.  Bellonius,  on  the  contrary,  looks  for  them  in 
Bulgaria  and  Wallachia,  where  their  Anceftors  are  laid  to  have 
lived,  under  the  name  (10)  Sigynner.  Cordova  thought  on 
Zigere,  formerly  a  city  of  Thrace,  which  he  affigns  as  their  (11) 
native  foil.  Some  people  fancied  they  had  heard  that  the  Gipfies 
called  themfelves  More,  and  often  ufed  the  name  amori  among 
•one  another  (not  amori,  but  dfcha  more  ....  get  out  fellow  !) 
and  now  they  are  (12)  Amorites.  ... 

Another  fet,  befides  this  or  that  particular  name  of  the  Gipfies, 
confidered  their  unfettled  way  of  life  alfo ;  or  culled  fome 
particular  circumftance,  from  their  manners,  by  which  they 
decided  concerning  their  origin.  Wherefore  they  were  fome- 
times  (13)  Torlaques,  Fakirs  or  (14)  Kalendars ;  fometimes  the 
remains  of  Attilas  [15]  Huns;  at  other  times  the  Avari,  who 
were  vanquifhed  by  Charles  the  Great ;  Then  again  Petfchenegers, 
who  played  their  laft  part  in  the  twelfth  ( 1 6)  century .;  or  perhaps 
a  mixture  of  all  kinds  of  rafcally  people  gathered  together,  having 
colleftively  no  certain  country,  as  their  name  Zigeuner  indicates, 
fignifying,  to  wander  up  and  down  :  for  which  reafon  our  German 
anceftors,  denominated  every  ftrolling  vagrant  (17)  Ziehegan. 
By  feveral  people  they  have  been  efteemed  inhabitants  of  the  Alps 
and  (18.)  Pyrenees,  others  fuppofe  them  to  be  Cain's  defcendants, 
who,  on  account  of  the  curfe,  denounced  againft  their  flock,  have 

been 


C    109    ) 

T)eeii    under    the    neceflity    of    leading    a    wandering   (19)   lite.     Chap.  III.. 

Becaufe  they   pretend  to  tell  fortunes,  fome  have  believed  thcni 

to  be  Chaldeans,   or  fomc  (20)   Syrian    religious  fedl.       Brod^sus 

formed  his  judgement  from   their  cloaths,  in  which  he  thought  he 

difcovered  a  refemblance  to  the  Roman  Toga,  tlierefore  imagined 

they  were  natives  of  Wallachia,  and  defcendants  from  the  colony, 

•fent  by  Trajan  into  Dacia,  in  order  to  keep  this  new  conquered 

country  fleady  in  their  allegiance.     And,  according  to  his  aflertion, 

people  in  Germany'do  really  call  them  Pf'^ahlen  (he  writes  JValacben) 

that  is  to  fay  (2 1 )  Italians. 

Thefe  opinions,  whether  united  or  fingle,  are  no  more  than 
mere  partial  conjeftures ;  I  (liall  therefore  not  proceed  witii  the 
•lift  of  them  :  bur  only  cite  a  few  which  feem  to  have  more 
appearance  of  probability.  Let  us  begin  (22)  with  Wagenseii,. 
He  looks  upon  the  Gipfies  to  be  German  Jews ;  -who,  about  the 
middle  of  the  Fourteenth  Century,  to  efcape  the  dreadful  perfe- 
cutions  which  raged  againft  them,  all  over  Europe,  efpecially  in 
Germany,  hid  themfelves  in  forefts,  (23)defarts,  and  fubterraneous 
caverns.  Here  they  remained  above  half  a  century,  and  made 
their  firft  appearance  again,  at  the  period  of  the  Huflites ;  as 
every  one  then  attended  only  to  the  Huffifh  herefy ;  with  regard 
to  the  Jews,  all  was  fafe.  But  not  daring  yet  to  venture,  paffing 
for  Jews,  they  fell  on  the  device  of  faying,  they  were,  not 
Chrlftians,  that  their  refpeift  for  the  Mofaical  Law  would  not 
permit,  but  in  general  terms,  ftilcd  themfelves  Egyptian  pilgrims. 
Thofe,  who  did  not  )'et  know  who  they  were,  nor  whence  they 
came  ;  from  their  wandering  about,  (einherziehen)  called  them, 
"Giplies  (Zigeuner).       'l"o  prove  this  origin  of  the  Gipfies,    he 

refers 


(        MO       ) 

Chap.  III.  refers  to  their  language,  which  is  a  mixture  of  German  avd 
Hebrew,  quoting,  at  the  fame  time,  near  fifty  words,  which  are 
evidently  Hebrew.  He  then  alks,  whence  fliould  the  Gipfies  have 
gotten  fo  many  Hebrew  words  into  their  language,  if  they  were 
not  Jews ;  at  a  time  too  when  Hebrew  was  unknown  to  all  other 
nations  ?  Now  this  opinion  bears  infinitely  more  the  appearance 
of  truth,  than  any  one  of  thofe  before  cited.  It  muft  alfo  have 
been  deemed  incontrovertible  by  the  learned  producer  of  it,  as  he 
mentions  it,  in  the  introduftion  to  his  treatife,  with  great  confidence, 
and  as  much  (24)  joy  as  if  he  had  difcovered  the  philofopher's 
ftone.  Notwithftanding  all  this,  the  confutation  is  fo  flrort  and 
eafy,  that  two  words  are  fufficient  to  overfet  the  whole  fyfliem  : 
which  refhs  entirely  on  the  proofs  of  the  language,  but  thefe  do 
not  apply  to  the  cafe  in  queftion,  the  words  quoted  are  taken  from 
3(25)  gibberifh  vocabulary,  but  gibberifh  is  (26)  not  the  Gipfey 
language.  What  relates  to  the  Jewifli  perfecution,  is  very  juft, 
but  all  the  refi:  are  mere  conjeclures,  founded  on  it  by  the  learned 
man,  and  frequently  very  (27)  inconfiftent. 

A  later  opinion  is,  that  the  Gipfies  are  an  hord  of  Tartars^ 
which  feparated  themfelves  from  the  multitude,  with  which  Timur 
invaded  Weftern  Aiia,  about  the  year  1401.  The  fuppofed  proofs 
are,  F/rJl,  becaufe  the  Mongols  (Mongols  and  Tartars  are  here 
reckoned  one  and  the  fame  (28)  people)  are  juft  as  nomadic  as 
the  Gipfies.  Secondly,  becaufe  thefe  have  fometimes  declared  them- 
felves to  be  Tartars.  'Thirdly,  becaufe  the  Gipfey  King,  mentioned 
by  Aventin,  whofe  name  was  Zundel  or  Zindelo,  a  Mongol 
Chan,  was  a  defcendant  from  the  great  Zingis :  as  Zindelo 
is  a  very  eafy  change  from  Zingis.     Fourthly,  becaufe,   among  tl:e 

feverai 


(  III  ) 

firveral  ftates  into  which  the  Mongol  Empire  was  divided,  after  Chap.  III. 
the  death  of  Zingis,  one  was  called  Dfongar,  and  the  members  of 
it  Dfongari,  which  agrees  perfeftly  with  Zingari.  Fifthly,  becaufe 
the  Tartar  and  Gipfey  language  have  a  great  affinity  ro  each 
other;  for  in  the  laft  war,  between  Ruffia  and  the  Port,  a  com- 
mander of  Crini  Tartars,  by  name  Devlet  Gueray,  fignalized 
himfelf  very  much ;  and  this  Devlet,  is  perhaps  derived  from 
Devla,  the  Gipfey  appellation  for  the  Deity,  and  may  be  a  name, 
under  which  the  Tartars  reverence  any  thing  refpeftable.  Sixthly, 
and  laftly,  becaufe  the  time  of  Timur's  expedition,  agrees  very 
well  with  the  firll  (29)  appearance  of  the  Gipfies.  This  is  an 
opinion  founded  on  fix  points,  and  one  might  add  in  confirmation 
of  it,  that  by  this  hypothefis,  it  may  reafonably  be  accounted  for, 
how  the  Gipfies,  fuch  poor  wretches  in  general,  came  to  be  (o 
well  ftored  with  gold  and  filver  at  their  fiift  arrival  in  Europe,  as 
Stumpf  and  others  aflert.  If  they  were  part  of  Timur's  followers, 
they  might  very  likely  have  it  by  robbery,  and  plunder  taken  from 
the  people  they  had  conquered. 

Among  all  thefe  grounds,  that  adduced  from  the  favorable 
concurrence  of  chronological  events,  has  the  moft  weight,  but 
proves  neither  more  nor  lefs,  than  the  bare  poffibility  of  the 
thing.  With  refpedl  to  the  firft  point,  it  is  not  fo  clearly  made 
out.  The  Tartars  are  herdfmen,  and  the  quality  of  the  pafture, 
for  their  cattle,  implies  a  fixed  refidence.  Gipfies,  on  the 
contrary  are  ignorant,  as  to  tending  cattle,  nor  have  they  the 
fmalleft  idea  about  breeding  them.  Further,  whether  they  are 
Tartars,  becaufe  they  give  themfelves  out  as  fuch,  or  have  been 
declared  fuch   by  other  people  :     whether  Zindelo  is  a  Mongol 

Chan, 


(    112    ) 

Chap.  III.  Chan,  bccaufc  his  name  is  eafily  derived  from  Zingis :  whether 
the  language  of  the  Tartars  bears  a  near  affinity  to  that  of  the- 
Gipfies,  becaufe  among  them  a  man  was  found,  whofe  name 
Devlct,  is  perhaps  derived  from  the  Gipfey  word  Devla,  and 
as  that  among  them  fignifies  God,  it  may  pofTibly,  among 
thefe,  fignify  fomething  like  it.  All  this  I  leave  to  the 
readers  difcretion.  If  thefe  affertions  are  admitted  for  proofs, 
then  the  Gipfies  muft  be  Bohemians,  becaufe  they  are  called  fo 
in  France.  Thus  Chiflet  muft  have  been  of  Gipfey  or  Tartar 
defcent,  becaufe  his  name  may  poffibly  be  derived  from  Devla  or 
Devlet.  The  Franks  too,  are  probably  derived  from  the  Trojans, 
becaufe  Pharamond,  their  King's  name,  may  be  formed  from 
Priamus.  Dfongari  and  Zingari  compared  with  each  other  do 
coincide,  except  that  the  latter  is  only  the  Latin  termination  given 
by  the  learned.  But  befides  all  this,  if  the  Gipfies  muft  be 
Tartars  at  all  events,  where  are  the  Tartars  broad  faces?  where 
is  their  courage  ?  where  are  the  zealous  religious  principles  with 
v\'hich  the  Tartars  honor  the  Deity,  and  upon  occafion,  fight 
for  him  ?  Finally,  with  regard  to  language,  this  rather  makes 
againft  than  in  favor  of  the  opinion  I  am  talking  of  The 
language  of  the  Tartars  is  Turkifti,  that  of  the  Gipfies  is  quite 
a  different  one,  as  I  fhall  prove  by  and  by. . 

As  thefe  and  the  like-  arguments  rather  controvert  the  Tartar 
origin  of  the  Gipfies,  fo  can  we  as  little  agree  with  Mr.  Pray, 
in  fuppoiing  them  to  be  (Tartars)  of  Asia  Miis'or,  from  the 
countries  of  the  Ancient  Zichen,  whole  name  the  Gipfies  are 
faid  to  bear;  nor  with  an  older  writer  Ekhard,  who  will  have 
it,    that  they  are  Circaflians,    which    were    terrified    from   their 

habitations 


(     ns     )  ^ 

Habitations  by  Timur's  Mongols.  Mr.  Pray  brings  nothing  in  Chap.  Ir5, 
fupport  of  his  furmile,  but  the  iimilarity  of  found  in  the  names 
Zigianer  (Ziehen  or  properly  Zygier)  and  Zigeuncr ;  togethei' 
with  the  circumftance,  that  the  latter  appeared  among  us,  foon 
after  Timur's  expedition  into  (30)  Afia  Minor.  Ekhard,  on 
the  contrary,  who  in  like  manner,  unites  the  names  Zigeuner 
and  Circaffier,  by  endeavouring  to  prove,  that  thefe,  as  pofleflbrs  . 
of  the  countries,  belonging  to  the  Ziehen ;  were,  by  authors 
indifferently  fliled,  fometimes  Circaffier,  fometimes  Zygier  and 
Ziehen ;  adds  moreover,  that  the  Circaffian  complexion  vvas  a 
brown  yellow,  exadly  like  the  Gipfies ;  that  they  both  luffer 
their  hair  to  hang  loofe  over  their  flioulders  :  further,  that  in  their 
diet  and  cloaths  they  are  both  equally  dirty,  and  laflly,  that  among 
the  Circaffians,  you  meet  (31)  with  aftrology,  and  all  kinds 
of  witchcraft,  precifely  the  fame  as  among  the  Gipfies.  But  this 
comparifon,  were  It  even  better  founded,  than  (32)  it  is,  would 
only  prove,  that  you  may  make  what  you  pleafe  of  the  Gipfies. 
Upon  the  fame  ground,  they  might  juft  as  well  be  allied  to  the 
people  of  Otaheite,  or  any  other  unpolifhed  nation,  in  any 
quarter  of  the  Globe.  And  yet,  the  author  draws  this  conclufion 
from  it,  that  one  egg  is  not  more  like  another,  than  Circaffians 
to  the  Gipfies;  and  he  may  confidently  affert,  that  all  thofe  who, 
before  his  time,  have  been  of  a  different  opinion,  were  (33)  miftaken. 
I  ought  long  ago  to  have  fpoken  about  the  reputed  Egyptian 
defcent  of  the  Gipfies,  but  as  that  has  been  a  very  current,  and 
almoft  univerfally  received  opinion,  it  merits  a  chapter  by  itfelf. 


Q^  CHAPTER 


Chap.  IV. 


(     "4     ) 

CHAPTER       IV. 

On  the  Rgvpt'ian  defcent  of  the  Gipfies. 


T, 


HE  belief  that  Gipfies  are  of  Egyptian  origin,  is  as  old 
as  the  exiftence  of  thefe  people  in  Europe.  It  aroie  from  the 
iirft  of  them  who  arrived  here,  having,  every  where,  publiflied, 
that  they  were  pilgrims  from  Egypt  ;  and  this  has  not  only  been 
univerfally  adopted,  by  the  common  people,  but  has  alio,  here 
and  there,  obtained  credit  among  men  of  learning.  Had  this 
opinion  not  been  harboured,  at  a  time,  when  every  thing  was 
taken  upon  truft  without  examination ;  had  it  not  been  pro- 
pagated every  where  by  the  firft  Gipfies,  and  received  the  fandtion 
of  time  in  following  ages,  it  would  have  been  impoffible  for  it  to 
have  gained  fuch  general  acceptation,  or  to  have  maintained 
itfelf  even  to  the  lateft  times. 

Till  the  laft  century,  the  Egyptian  defcent  of  the  Gipfies  refted, 
entirely,  on  tradition.  Thomasius  was  the  firft,  who  en- 
deavoured to  ground  this  matter  on  fatisfaclory  evidence.  Thofe 
who,  fince  him,  have  purfued  the  fame  method,  are  principally 
the  Englifliman  Salmon  ;  and  now  lately,  Signor  Griselini. 
But  before  I  produce  their  vouchers,  I  muft  premife,  that 
Thomasius  talks  only  of  thofe  Gipfies,  who  travelled  about 
Europe,  the  firft  (i)  feven  years  after  their  arrival  ;  for  he 
thinks,  that,  after  fevcn  years  were  elapfed,  thefe,  except  (2)  a 
very  few,  rettirned  home  again,  and  after  their  retreat,  the  prelent 
ict  was  produced,  as  has  been  already  defcribcd.     In  this  particular, 

he 


(     "5     ) 

he  differs  entirely  from  the  other  two  writers,  making  the  latter     Chap.  IV. 
Gipfies  a  cUftlndt  race  of  people  from  the  firfl.     On  the  contrary, 
Salmon,   as  well  as  Griselini,    efleem  thofc,   and  with  truth, 
to  be  lineal  delcendants  of  thcfc,    confequently   bring    them    all 
from   Egypt. 

Thomasius  fays.  "  The  firft  Gipfies  never  would  allow 
"  themfelves  to  be  any  thing  but  Egyptians ;  afferting  always, 
"  that  the  LefTer  Egypt  was  their  mother  country,  and  they 
"  deferve  credit,  as  they  were  (3)  an  honorable  worthy  fet 
"  of  people."  There  is  only  this  to  be  obferved  againft  it,  that 
among  the  oldeft  writers,  who,  prior  to  Stumpf,  mention  the 
Gipfies,  not  one  feems  to  be  acquainted  with  their  worth. 
Though  Thomasius  himfelf  difcovered  the  weaknefs  of  his  firft 
argument,  therefore  haftens  to  another.  "  Be  this  as  it  may," 
he  proceeds,  "  they  were  in  the  earlieft  times,  when  doubtlefs 
"  fomething  more  certain  was  extant,  always  looked  upon  as  (4) 
"  Eo'vptians  :  fo  that  it  docs  not  become  us,  who  live  two 
"  hundred  years  later,  pofitively  to  rejeft  (5)  what  was,  at  that 
"  time  generally  aflcnted  to."  But  this  kind  of  reafoning  proves 
too  much,  for  by  the  fame  mode  of  arguing,  every  antiquated 
error,  everv  ridiculous  fuperllition,  may  be  defended.  If  this  holds 
i^ood,  Satan  gets  his  cloven  foot  again,  which  modern  unbelief 
had  bereft  him  of.  Thus  Christian  Thomasius  aftcd  un- 
juftifiably,  when  he  laid  violent  hands  on  witches  and  forcerers, 
and  put  an  end  to  their  exiftence,  though  credited  from  the 
higheft  antiquity.  If  Thomasius  imagines  there  were  other 
proofs,  befides  the  Gipfies  own  aflertions,  that  they  were 
Egyptians,  this  conceit,  not  only  has  nothing  to  fupport  it,  but, 

0^2  is 


C     ii6     ) 

Ckap.  IV.  is  openly  contradicted  by  Aventin,  Kranz,  and  Muntster. 
It  is  not  authenticated,  becaufe  the  chronicles  univerfally  mention 
it  as  a  (6)  laying  of  the  Gipfies,  whenever  they  fpeak  of  their 
-coming  from  Egypt.  It  is  confuted  by  Aventin,  who  rejefts 
their  Egyptian  defcent,  at  the  fame  time  he  alledges,  that  they 
wiflied  to  be  thought  to  (7)  come  from  thence.  In  his  time, 
nothing  was  known  concerning  them,  except  what  came  from 
their  own  mouths  :  and  thofe  who  believed  them  to  be  Egyptians, 
did  It  entirely  on  the  credit  of  their  word.  This  is  coUefted, 
with  greater  certainty,  from  Kranz  and  Mlinster;  for  thefe 
'declare  expreffly,  that  every  thing  which  could  be  dlfcovered,  by 
any  other  means  than  their  own  aflertions,  (8)  contradifted  rather 
than  confirmed  their  Egyptian  defcent.  Yet  Thomasius  has 
more  proofs;  he  cites  the  refemblance  between  the  Gipfies  and 
the  inhabitants  of  the  LeiTer  Egypt,  from  whence  they  fay  they 
came.  But  many  people  lay  this  difficulty  in  his  way,  that  the 
name  of  Lefler  Egypt,  is  not  to  be  foup.d  in  any  fyftem  of 
Geography,  but  Is  a  mere  (9)  indention  of  the  Gipfies.  He 
refts  his  opinion  on  that  of  Vulcanius,  who  looks  upon  Nubia 
to  be  the  LeflTer  Egypt,  and  thinks,  I  do  not  know  why,  that  the 
Nubians  themfelves,  called  their  country  (10)  by  that  name. 
Now  the  fimilarities  confifl:  herein.  Nubians  as  well  as  Gipfies, 
confcfs  themfelves  Chrlftlans,  both  lead  a  wandering  life,  and  both 
arc  of  a  dark  brown  complexion.  To  which  fome  rcfemblances 
in  Ihapc  between  the  Gipfies  and  Egyptians  are  introduced  (11) 
in  general  terms.  Whether  there  be  any  affinity  in  their 
'languages,  he  leav'es  undetenrfined,  becaule,  lie  fays,  he  knows 
^i<z)  nothiag  about  It.     That  the  name  of  Zigeuner,    is  the  fame 

as 


(     i'7     ) 

R3  Egyptian,  and  the  former  is  derived  from  the  latter,  he  proves     Ct.ip.  TV. 
in  the  following  ingenious  manner.     The  Spaniards,  who  inilead 
of  Egyptaner,   call    them  Gitanos,  have  cur  off  the  firft  fyllable.     " 
Our    forefathers    who   exceeded    the     Spaniards,      in    the  art   of 
mangling    names,    have    rejected    two    fyllables,     and    inftead   of 
Egyptianer,  firft  called   them  Cianer,   afterwards,   in  order   to  fill 
up   the  chafm  between  i  and  a,    faid  Cigancr.     Further,  as   we, 
inftead  of  Italianer  fay  Italiener,   we  have  alfo  changed  Ciganer 
into  Cigener ;     and  at  laft,  as  people  in  Upper  Germany  are  very 
fond  of  diphthongs,  Cigeuner,   or  (13)   Zigeuner  has  been  pro- 
duced.     Now  if  any  thing   can  be   proved,    by  all  this,   in   the 
fame  manner,  the  ieveral  opinions,  quoted  in  the  former  chapter 
are  likewife  proved.     And  yet  after  all,  who  will  fay,   that  inftead 
of  Egyptier,     Egyptianer    from    whence  Cianer,    Ciganer,    and 
thus  progreffively,    through    all    the    changes  Zigeuner  may  be 
produced  ?     With   regard   to   the  denomination  of  Lefler  Egypt, 
ranked  under  the  lift  of  Gipfey  fables,  and  brought  as  evidence 
to  overfet  their  whole  fyftem,  becaufe  Egypt   never  was  divided 
into  Greater  and  Smaller,  it  is  neverthelefs  a  true  Geographical 
name  :     I  allow  it  is  not  to  be  found  in  any  treatife  on  Geography, 
but    1    have  met   with   it,    in  the    title   of  a   Turkilh  Emperor. 
A  declaration  of  war,  made  by  Achmet  IV.  againft  John  Cafimir 
King    of   Poland    in    1652,    begins  with  the  following    words. 
"  J  Sultan,  a  King  and  Son  of  the  Turkilli  Emperor,  a  foldier  of 

"  tlie  God  of  the  Greeks  and  Babylonians King  of  the  Greater 

"  "'''^  Lefer  (i^)  Egypt."  Therefore  the  Gipfies  have  been  fiilfely 
accufed  of  a  fiftion.  But  whether  by  this  Leffer  Egypt,  Lower 
Egypt,    or  any  thing  elfe  be  underftood,   I  cannot  determine. 

Salmon- 


(    lis    ) 

Chap.  IV.         Salmon    believes   the  Gipfies  to  be  Mamalukes,    who    were 
oblio-ed  to  quit    Egypt,   in   1517,    when  the   Turkifh   Emperor 
conquered    this  country,    and    thereby   put    an   (15)  end   to    the 
Circaffian  government.     They   are  reputed  to   have  acquired   the 
name  of  Zigeuner,   or  in  the  Turkilb  language  ZInganies,   from 
a  Captain  Zinganeus,  v/ho  was  very  aftive  in  oppofmg  the  Turks. 
How  all  this  is  proved,   I  fhall  {hew,  in  his  own  words.     "  They 
"  had  no  occafion  for  any  teftimony,  to  flievv  they  were  of  Egyptian 
"  defcent.     The   blacknefs  of  their  fliin  made  it   plain  eno\igh, 
"■  from  what  part  they  came.     What  confirms  me,   in  my  belief 
"  of  this  intellegencc,   concerning  the  origin  of  the  Gipfies,  is  an 
"  Aft  of  Parliament,   paffed  in  the   twenty  feventh    year  of  the 
"  reign  of  Henry  VIII.  that  is,  fourteen  years  after  the  viftory 
'  obtained  by  Selim,    Emperor  of  the  Turks,   over  Egypt ;  in 
"  which    are    the    following   vVords.     *  IVbercas  certain   outlandiJJ:) 
"  feopl;,  zvbo   do   not  profefs  any  craft  or  trad',  whereby   to   maintain 
'''   themfeli-cs ;   but  go  about,   in  great  numbers,  from  place   to  place ; 
"  v-Jing  infidious  underhand  means,  to  impofe  on  his  Majefly's  fubjeEls, 
"  'Making  them  believe,    that  they  underfland    the  art    of  foretelling 
'*  to  men  and  ivomen,  their  good  or  ill  fortune,   by  looking  in  their 
"  hands;   zvherebv  they  frequently  defraud  people  of  their  tnoney ;  like- 
"  zvife  are  guilty  of  thefts  and  highway  robberies ;  it  is  hereby  ordered, 
"  that  the  fiid  vagrants,    commonly   called  Egyptians,    in    cafe   they 
"  remain  one  month  in  the  kingdom,  flnill  be  proceeded  againjl,  as  thieves 
"  and  rafdls,  and  on  the  apprehenfton  of  any  fuch  Egyptian,  he  fialt 
"  forfeit  £\o  .  .  .  fir  every    trefpfs."     He  then  quotes  another 

aft, 

*  Note. — As  (his  quotation  ftands  in  the  body  of  the  work,  the  Tranfljtor  thought  proper  to  give  a 
riteral  tiandation  of  it,  although  it  does  not  perfeflly  ^.^xtt  with  the  Aft,    nor  is  th;  date  correft. 


(     i'9     ) 

ad:,  pafled  under  Queen  Elizabeth,  wherein  the  GIpfies,  are  alfo     Chan.  ly. 
called  (i6)  Egyptians. 

Therefore  from  the  blackncfs  of  their  fkins,  w  itli  the  official  life 
of  the  name  Egyptian,  Salmon  firft  draws  the  inference,  that 
they  were,  really  Egyptians  :  then,  becaufc  the  fiiil  decree, 
publiflied  againft  the  Giplies  in  England,  was  fourteen  years  after 
Selim's  conqucft  of  Egypt,  that  they  were  Mamaluk.es.  There  is 
not  any  connexion,  to  be  difcovered  either  in  the  one  or  the 
other.  The  Parliament  made  ufe  of  the  word  Egyptian,  in  the 
act,  becaufe  it  was  the  one,  univerfiUy,  current  in  England. 
Whether  the  Gipfies  were,  really,  Egyptians,  or  no,  was  a 
queftion  of  learning,  that  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  intention 
of  the  order  ;  nor  could  it  be  determined,  by  any  juridical  decree. 
There  is  ftill  lefs  reafon  for  his  making  them  Mamalukcs,  who 
had  travelled  from  Egypt,  on  its  being  taken  by  Selim  in  1517, 
and  tracing  their  name  from  one  of  their  leaders ;  as  both  they, 
and  their  name  were  known  in  Europe,  at  leaft  an  hundred  years 
preceeding  the  fall  of  Giiwry ;  or  before  Tumanbai,  the  lateft 
hope  of  the  Mamalukes,   was    ( 1 7)    hanged. 

I  proceed  to  Griselini,  whofe  reafons  are  the  moft  numerous 
of  any,  and  would  certainly  go  a  great  way  towards  afccrtaining 
the'Egyptian  origin  of  the  Gipfies,  if,  as  in  moil  invefligations, 
it  did  not  depend  more  upon  the  quality,  than  the  number  of 
the  proofs.  Yet  he  does  not  reckon  them  to  be  genuine  Egyp- 
tians, and  for  this  reafon,  becaufe  t!ie  grcateil  number  of  thoie 
refemblances,  which  he  has  fought  between  Egyptians  and  Gipfies, 
intended  to  prove  the  latter  dekcndcd  from  the  former,  are  not 
at  all  cafes  in  point.     Befjdes,  he  finds  himicif  tmder  the  neceffitt  . 

of 


(        I20       ) 

Chap.  IV.  of  looking  for  foreign  helps,  and  what  he  cannot  make  out  to  be 
Egyptian,  among  the  Gipfies,  he  meets  with  among  the  jEthio- 
pians  and  Troglodytes  :  thefe  he  introduces  promifcuouily,  kneads 
the  whole  together,  and  determines  the  Gipfies  to  be  a  mixture  of 
^Ethiopians,  ( 1 8)  Egyptians,  and  Troglodytes.  This  very  circum- 
ftance,  even  before  one  hears  his  reafons,  rendei-s  the  matter  very 
fufpicious.  By  the  fame  method,  it  would  not  be  very  difficult 
to  fhew,  that  the  Italians  are,  in  part,  on  account  of  their 
naftinefs,  Oftiacks ;  in  part,  becaufe  of  their  fuperftition,  and 
admiration  of  magnificent  edifices,  Egyptians ;  and  laftly,  in 
part,  for  their  daftardly  treacherous  revenge,  Ghinefe. 

Griselini  begins  his  comparifons,  with  the  Difpofition  of 
the  Gipfies.  He  fays,  "  They  are  inclined  to  melancholy, 
and  are  defperate,  in  the  firft  emotions  of  their  anger, 
Ammianus  Marcellinus  defcribes  the  Egyptians,  of  his  time, 
in  (19)  much  the  fame  terms." 

"  AVith  regard  to  religion,"  he  proceeds,  "  the  Gipfies  of  the 
IJanat  always  conform  to  the  prevailing  one,  in  the  village,  be 
it  Catholic  or  the  lllyrlan  Greek.  They  have  not  the  leaft 
comprehenfibn,  either  of  the  one,  or  the-  other;  in  which 
ignorance  they  perfedly  refemble  the  Wallachians,  —  except 
that  they  obferve  the  ftrid  fafts  of  the  Greek  Church  with 
more  exaftnefs.  The  Wallachians  only  feparate  from  their 
wives,  the  laft  days  of  the  great  fafts :  the  Gipfies,  on  the 
contrary,  do  It,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  alfo  on  the 
Afcenfion  of  the  Blefled  Virgin,  in  Advent,  and  efpecially  all 
Vigils.  Among  other  writers  of  Antiquity,  Apuleius  (20) 
tflkes    particular  notice    of    the  Egyptian   fafls,  whofe   ftriftnefs 

confifted 


confiflcd  chiefly  in  this,  that  the  man  held  himfelf  obliged   to     Chap.  IV- 
refrain  from  his  confort's  bed." 

"  But  befidcs  thefe  folemn  fafts,  the  Gipfies  of  the  Banat, 
obierve  a  degree  of  temperance,  and  a  choice  in  their  diet,  even 
on  thofe  days  when  all  kinds  of  food  are  permitted.  They  abftain 
from  frogs  and  tortoifes,  wherein  they  accord  with  the  Wallachians, 
Raizes,  and  other  Chriftians  of  the  Greek  Church.  Moreover, 
they  refrain  from  Ibme  kinds  of  river  fiih,  viz.  the  red  fcaled  ' 
bream,  perch,  and  lampreys ;  of  which  forts  it  is  known  that  the 
Egyptians,  the  race  of  Likopolis  and  Tagaroriopolis  refufed  to 
tafte.  The  Gipfies  have  likewife  an  averfion  to  all  feathered  game, 
and  particularly  to  birds  of  prey.  The  ftork  is  highly  efteemed 
among  them,  when  he  deigns  to  build  on  their  wretched  huts. — ■ 
One  of  thefe  birds,  which,  like  its  relation  Ibis,  was  an  objeft  of 
worfliip,  among  other  fymbolical  Egyptian  deities." 

"  Of  four  footed  animals,  the  Gipfies  are  moft  fond  of  fwine's 
flefh,  particularly  faked.  The  Egyptians  likewife  confumed  a 
great  number  of  thefe  creatures,  though  they  looked  upon  their 
herds,  and  keepers  to  be  unclean." 

"  The  Gipfies  hang  up  large  onions  in  their  dwellings,  but  do 
not  eat  them.  Befides,  that  the  Egyptians  (21)  honored  them, 
as  well  as  many  other  vegetables,  we  are  informed  by  Diodorus 
Siculus,  that  by  the  regulations,  relating  to  diet,  obferved  in 
the  different  Egyptian  provinces,  onions  were  prohibited  in  fome, 
but  allowed  in  others." 

"  The  Gipfies,  like  the  old  Egyptians,  cannot  bear  the  fmell 
of  beans,  although  their  neighbours,  the  Wallachians,  eat  them 
with  pleafure." 

R  "  When 


(        122       ) 

Chap.  IV.  "  When  I  was  at  Denta,  in  the  diftrid  of  Clakowa,  curiofity 
led  me  into  a  Gipfey  hut.  The  firft  thing  which  attraded  my 
attention,  was  a  young  man,  covered  with  the  itch,  whofe  mother 
was  feeding  him  with  tlie  boiled  flefli  of  a  fmall  fnake,  on  a 
dirty  earthern  plate.  In  the  lame  manner  the  Egyptians  ufed 
the  flefh  of  fnakes,  as  the  mildeft,  and  moft  effedual  remedy  for 
the  elephantiafis." 

"  Every  body  knows  that,  even  to  this  day,  fowls  and  other 
of  the  feathered  kind,  are  hatched  by  art  in  Egypt.  —  I  mull 
confefs,  I  was  not  a  little  furprized  in  July  1775,  as  I  went  into 
a  Gipfey  hut,  before  Karanfebes,  to  fee  an  old  woman,  who  had 
about  forty  goofe  and  ducks  eggs,  in  horfe  dung,  to  hatch.  This 
was  exaftly  the  method  of  the  old  Egyptians." 

"  From  all  which  has  hitherto  been  produced,  as  well  as  that 
the  Gipfies  of  the  Banat,  and  others  difperfed  over  the  reft  of 
Europe,  declare  themfelves  to  be  Egyptians,  it  is  highly  probable 
that  this  is  really  their  origin.  But  fee  a  nearer  refemblance. 
So  long  ago,  as  in  JEVmn's  tinie,  the  Egyptians  were  famous 
for  their  patience,  in  enduring  all  kinds  of  torture;  and  would 
rather  expire,  on  the  rack,  than  be  brought  to  (22)  confeffion; 
which  is  a  ftriking  trait  of  the  Gipfies.  When,  this  equivocal 
method  of  coming  at  the  truth,  the  torture,  was  praftifed,  in 
the  Imperial  Royal  Hereditary  Dominions,  one  remembers 
feveral  inftances,  that  Gipfies  fuffered  themfelves  to  be  torn  to 
pieces,  fooner  than  acknowledge  crimes,  even  when  the  magiftrates 
had  the  moft  indifputable  proofs  of  them." 

Thus  far  has  been  to  prove  the  Egyptian  defcent  of  the 
Gipfies.     What  follows  is  againft  it,  and,  from  the  fimilarity  of 

their 


(       '23       ) 

their  condition,   is  tp  convince    us  that  they  arc  of  Ethiopian     Chap,  IV", 
and  Troglodytldi  origin. 

**  According  to  the  mod  authentic  writers,  the  Egyptians  took 
great  pains,  to  build  themfelves  convenient  habitations.  They 
lived  decently,  and  their  attention  to  cleanlinefs,  in  the  obfervance 
of  certain  mles  of  health,  was  fo  general,  that  even  the  peafants, 
and  the  lowell  claffes  of  people  in  the  nation,  were  no  exception 
to  it.  —  The  refidence  of  the  Gipfies,  in  the  Banat,  prefents  us 
with  a  very  different  kind  of  pidlure.  MIferable  huts,  confifting, 
partly  of  thorns  and  draw  packed  together,  and  partly  of  holes, 
ten  or  twelve  feet  deep,  dug  in  the  earth. — Taken  in  this  point 
of  view,  the  Gipfies  have  more  the  appearance  of  being  delated 
to  the  hords  of  ^Ethiopians  and  Troglodytes." 

"  Among  the  ancient  Egyptians,  agriculture  was  In  high 
efteem ;  as  It  fllll  Is  among  the  prefent  Copts,  their  true  defcen- 
dants. — The  Gipfies,  on  the  contrary,  are  the  worft,  and  moft 
carelefs  farmers  that  can  be :  another  argument  for  their  being 
^Ethiopians  and  Troglodytes." 

"  Thefe,  and  other  African  hords,  employ  themfelves  in 
colleding  gold  out  of  the  (23)  river  fand  ;  In  like  manner,  the 
Marofch,  Nera,  and  other  ftreams,  have  induced  the  Gipfies  to 
become  goldwafhers." 

"  That  unfettled  way  of  life,  and  inclination  for  ftrolHng, 
which  the  Egyptians  were  fo  very  averfe  to,  is  the  particular 
propenfity  of  the  Gipfies  In  general ;  nor  are  thofe  of  the  Banat 
exempt  from  It." 

"  The  more  artful,  particularly  of  the  other  fcx,  go  about 
from  houfe  to  houfe,  where   they  tell   fortunes,    caft  nativities, 

R  2  difcover 


(     1^4     ) 

"  Cliap.  IV.  difcover  thefts,  and  pretend  they  poffefs  remedies,  to  which  they 
afcribe  wonders  and  infallible  cures.  Thefe  noftrums  confift,  chiefly 
of  roots,  amulets,  certain  ftnall  ftones,  moftly  a  kind  of  fcoria. 
Among  the  Egyptians,  likewife,  fuch  impoftors  rambled  up  and 
■  down.  Thefe  were  Jithiopians  by  defcent,  who  carried  on  pretty 
much  the  fame  trade." 

"  From  the  laft  confiderations,  compared  with  the  former,  one 

would  be  inclined  rather  to  deduce  the  origin  of  the  Gipfies  from 

'the    Ethiopians    and    Troglodytes,    than    from    the    Egyptians. 

But  what  I  am  going  to   add,   will  make  it  more  probable,    that 

they  are  a  mixture  of  all  the  (24)  three  nations." 

"  It  is  well  known,  that  people  of  both  fexes,  calling  them- 
■'fe'lves  Egyptian  priefls  and  prieftefles,  were,  in  ancient  times, 
fcattered  through  Italy,  Greece,  and  all  the  Provinces  of  the 
Roman  Empire  :  where  they  not  only  introduced  the  worfhip 
of  the  Goddefs  Ifis,  but  wandered  from  place  to  place,  begged, 
and  profelled  the  fame  kinds  of  ingenuity,  in  which  the  Gipfies 
■of  the  Banat,  and  the  reft  of  their  brethren,  difperfed  over  Europe, 
are  fo  thoroughly  verfed.  Thefe  faid  priefts  and  prieftefles,  which 
Apuleius,  ironically  calls  magnae  rellgionis  fidera,  (25)  not 
only  knocked  at  people's  doors,  in  Rome,  with  their  fiftris,  but 
even  had  the  Ikill  to  perfuade  the  common  people,  that  to  refufe 
them  alms,  or  to  commit  facrilege,  was  equally  heinous.  They 
even  went  fo  far  as  to  threaten  thofe,  who  flighted  them,  in  the 
name  of  their  Goddefs  Ifis,  to  ftrike  them  with  blindnefs,  or 
the  tympany  (hydrops  tympanites).  —  Aventin  fays,  the  Gipfies 
could  fo  terrify  the  people  in  Bavaria,  with  the  like  threats, 
that  they  fufFered  themfelves  to  be  robbed  by  them  with  impunity. 

Likewiie 


Likewife    in    the   Banat,    one   hears    tlie    womch,    particularly,     Chap.  IV.. 
vent    the    mofl    horrid    curfes    and     imprecations,    if    they    are 
reprimanded,  or  not  paid  for  their  calculations  of  nativities,  finging, 
or  fortune  telling." 

"  The  licentioufnefs  and  immorality  of  the  Gipfies  is  extreme. 
In  early  youth,  when  yet  young  girls,  they  exhibit  themfelves, 
with  their  dances,  before  every  perfon,  from  whom  they  expeft 
any  prefent ;  and  thefe  dances  always  end  in  lafclvious  attitudes 
and  fhameful  gefhires,  expofmg  thofe  parts,  which  even  the  moft 
■uncultivated,  uncivilized  people,  from  fonie  remaining  fenfe  of 
decency,  keep  concealed.  In  like  manner,  the  ordinary  women 
in  Egypt,  ufed  to  dance  at  their  Orgies,  efpecially  at  the 
:feaft  of  Buboftes,  and  the  proceffion  of  Canopus.  The  like 
fcenes  appeared  at  Rome,  among  tlie  wives,  daughters,  and 
fponfors  of  the  priefts  of  Ifis,  agreeable  to  the  myfleries  of  that 
Goddefs." 

After  all  this  Griselini  comes  to  the  point.  "  To  what 
nation  did  thefe  priefts  and  priefteffes  belong  ?  And  when  did  their 
•emigration  happen?" 

"  It  was  after  the  time  of  Auguftus,"  he  fays,  "  that  they 
began  to  wander,  through  the  different  parts  of  Europe  ;  in  every 
■diftrict,  of  which,  they  endeavoured  to  fpread  the  worfliip  of  Ifis. 
They  praftifed  Aftrology,  and  other  kinds  of  fuperftition,  par- 
ticularly all  forts  of  vagrants  tricks,  pretty  much  in  the  fame 
manner,  as  the  Gipfies,  of  our  age,  deceive  people." 

"  Now  it  is  known,  that  the  Egyptian  priefts  had  ftated 
incomes,  from  appropriated  lands,  which  circumftance  attached 
them    to    their    native    country,     they  hated    an    unfcltled   life. 

Neither 


C      1^6     ) 

Chap.  IV.  Neither  did  they  defire  to  make  profelytes,  fo  that  ftrangers,  v\'ho'. 
wilhed  •  to  be  initiated,  into  the  rites  and  myfteries  of  Ifis,  were 
obliged  to  fubmit  to  be  circumcifed ;  this  ceremony  was-, 
indifpenfible  ;  on  the  contrary,  the  beforementioned  priefts  of  Ifis^ 
wandering  about  the  Roman  provinces,  never  mentioned  a  word 
of  circumcifion  to  their  new  converts.  Very  fenfible  critics  have 
produced  palpable  evidence,  that  they  were  Ethiopians  and  (26) 
Troglodytes,  who  could  the  more  ealily  pafs  for  Egyptians,  as. 
their  features,  peribns,  cuftoms  and  religion  were  the  fame." 

"  Of  all  the  writers,  who  mention  thefe  emigrations,  from 
Egypt,  into  Italy,  Greece,  and  every  quarter  of  the  globe,  which 
was  known  in  the  time  of  the  Romans,  I  fhall  refer  only  to 
Heliodorus.  It  is  very  pofTible,  that,  fometimes,  real  Egyptians- 
might  be  mixed  with  thefe  wanderers ;  who  had  been  driven  by 
misfortunes,  from  their  native  country,  or  perhaps,  fome  of  the 
-very  loweft  rank  of  people,  who  had  nothing  to  lofe.  From 
this  mixture  of  Ethiopians,  Troglodytes,  and  Egyptians,  then, 
fprang  a  diftinft  wandering  people,  which  partakes,  in  fome 
meafure,  of  all  the  three  nations,  and  from  which,  according  to 
the  foregoing  obfervations,  we  may  reafonably  conclude  the 
Gipfies,  of  our  time,  to  be  defcended  ;  as  in  all  of  them  we 
difcover,  fometimes  the  Troglodyte,  fometimes  the  Ethiopian, 
and',  fometimes  the  Egyptian." 

"  That  no  mention  is  made  of  them,   in   the  Hungarian  yearly- 
publications,   before   the  year  141  7,   is  by  no  means  a  proof,   that: 
they  were  not   known,    long  before,   both  in  that  Kingdom  and 
the  Banat.     If  we  admit  the  Roman   coins,  which  are  dug  out  of 
the  earth,  as  proof  that  the  Romans  have  been  inhabitants  of  any 

place,. 


(       127       ) 

place,  without:  the  concurrent  tcftimony  of  any  hiftorian  ;     we  are     Chap.  IV. 

juft  as  well  authorifed  to  admit  the  little  Egyptian  idols,  of  bronze, 

which  are  dug  up  near  them  in  the  Banat,  as  proof  for  the  Gipfies. 

Being  dilperfed,    all  over  the  Roman  conquefls,  why  might  they 

not  as  well,    when   Dacia  became  a   province,    have   gone  there 

likewife,   and   propagated  the  worlhip  of  His,  Anubis,  and  other 

Egyptian  Deities  the  fame  (27)  as  in  Italy." 

Thele  are  Mr.  Griselini's  arguments,   ftated   very  diffufely, 
as  they  may  be  found  in  his  works.     I  have  given  them  fo  much 
at  large,  not  merely  with  a  view  of  following  them  with  as  copious 
a  confutation ;    but  more  particularly  to  put  myfelf  out  of  the 
reach  of  confutatrion  :     as  I  am  convinced,  that,  what  he  adduces, 
in  fupport  of  his  argument,  is  a  direft  proof  that  it  cannot  be 
proved.     Suppofing  any  perfon  charitable  enough,   to  allow  there 
is  good  argument  in  his  far  fetched  fimilarities ;    y^t  the  circum- 
ftance,  that  neither  in  the  Hungarian,  nor  in  any  other  Journals, 
the  leaft  notice  is  taken,  of  Gipfies,  before  the  year  141 7,  would 
overfet  the  whole  again.     Griselini  felt  this  himfelf,  but  what 
he  urges  in  reply,  is  no  anfwer  to  the  objedion.     Nor  is  it  at  all 
juft,  that  the  Roman  coins,  found  in  the  Banat,  fliould  be  efteemed 
without  concurrent  teftimony,  a  proof  of  the  Romans  having  formerly 
dwelt  there.    German  crowns,  are,  as  Mr.  Niebuhr  informs  us,  the 
chief  current  coin  in  Yemen,  (Arabia  Felix)  and  great  numbers  are 
yearly  fent  thither  for  coffee.     If  fome  time  hence,  when  things  are 
entirely  changed,  the  faid  German  money  ITiould  be  dug  up,  would 
any  hiftorical  writer  have  afferted  a  tnith,  when  he  wiflied°to  perfuade 
his  cotemporarles,  that  Arabia  ^Felix  had  formerly  been  inhabited 
by  Germans  !     But  I  iliall  not  enter  into  any  confutation,    that 

being 


C    J  28-   )• 

Chap.  IV.  being  already  doiie  in  a  very  able  manner  by  anotkefj 
Mr.  SiiLZER.  (28)  Y'et  a  few  hints,  with  refpeit  to 
Mr..  Griselini's  mode  of  proceeding,  ftrike  me  in  fo  forcible 
a  manner,  that  1  cannot  forbear  to  communicate  them. 

He  builds  chiefly  upon  certain  fimilarities,  between  the  Giplies, 
Egyptians,  and  ^Ethiopians,  without  reflecting  whether  they  are 
diftindions  peculiar  to  thefe  people  only.  Of  this  fort  are,  for 
example,  that  tlie  Gipfies  muft  be  Troglodytes  and  ^Ethiopians, . 
becaufe  they  follow  the  employment  of  goldwafliing,  and  thefe 
latter,  as  well  as  feme  of  the  African  hords,  do  the  lame  in  their 
rivers  which  produce  gold;  or  when  he  makes  them  Egyptians, 
becaufe  they  eat  fwine's  flefli,  or  finally,  that  they  muft  be  priefts 
of  Ifis,  becaufe  they  grumble  violently  againft  the  hard  hearted, 
who  refufe  the  boon  they  afk.  Are  thefe  then  things,  which, 
none  but  Egyptians  and  /Ethiopians  have  in  common  with  the 
Gipfies?  Is  it  neceflary  to  recur  back  to  the  Egyptians,  to  find 
people,  befides  Gipfies,  who  eat  pork  ?  Or  to  the  priefl:s  of  Ifis, 
for  fturdy  beggars  ?  And,  with  regard  to  goldwafliers,  how 
came  he  not  to  recolleft,  that  the  Wallachians  alfo,  follow  this 
employment  ?  And  that  near  Strafijurg,  befides  other  places, 
hundreds  of  people,  who  are  nothing  lefs  than  Gipfies,  get  their 
living  by  it. 

Further,  the  faid  Mr.  Griselini,  in  order  to  render  his 
fyftem  the  more  plaufible,  has  made  ufe  of  certain  expedients,  at 
the  expence  of  truth;  and,  in  fpite  of  all  experience  to  the 
contrary,  fo  modelled  the  properties  of  the  Gipfies,  as  to  make 
them  appear  compleat  Egyptian?..  He  makes  them,  by  nature, 
inclined  to  melancholy,  whereas .  their  difpofitions  have  not  the 

leaft 


(       129      ) 

ieafl:   tincture   of  it :    they  arc  dclcribed  as  mod  conft;ientioufly,     Chap.  IV. 

nay,  rather  fuperftitiouflj'',  attached  to  religious  cuftoms  ;    and  yet, 

according  to  the  univerfal  teftiniony  of  other  obfervers  of  thefe 

people,  they  have  not  their  equals,  for   indilFerence  concerning 

every   thing  at    all    connefled    with    religion.      Me    pronounces 

them  avcrfc  to  eating  onions ;  and  as  for  beans,  they  abhor  them, 

whereas  Sulzer  was  a  witnefs,  how  much    they  liked    the  flavor 

of  both.     If  people  will  go  on  at  this  rate,  every  thing  may  be 

made    to  anfwer  every   purpofe.     But  woe   to    the    records,    and 

hiftories,  which  are  ufed  in  this  manner. 

From  what  has  been  treated  hitherto,  we  fee  the  Egyptian 
defcent  of  the  Gipfics  nothing  lefs  than  proved  ;  notwithflanding 
it  was  fo  generally  credited,  and  even  is  to  this  day.  It  is  really 
to  be  lamented,  for  had  they  originated  from  Egypt,  care  was 
taken  that  we  fhould  know,  what  kind  of  people  they  had  been 
in  that  country.  It  is  related  very  confidently,  and  to  our  great 
edification,  that  their  forefathers  were  the  fame  forcerers,  who 
imitated  Mofes's  miracles,  in  the  prefence  of  Pharoah.  More- 
over this  King,  likewife,  fet  thefe  people  as  tafkmafters,  over  the 
Children  of  Ifrael,  in  order  to  make  their  labor  grievous  to 
them.  And,  finally,  thefe  were  the  very  murderers,  employed 
by  the  inhuman  Herod,  to  perpetrate  his  cruelty  on  the  children 
of  Bethlehem.  This  kind  of  dreaming  fias  been  carried  further, 
it  having  been  calculated,  to  what  degree  of  indolence  thefe 
people  had  accuftomed  themfelves,  in-  Egypt,  living  by  the  labor 
and  fweat  of  others.  Afterwards,  when,  contrary  to  expectation, 
the  Children  of  Ifrael  efcaped  from  their  fervitude ;  the  lucrative 
advantage  of  thefe  oveifeers,  of  courfe,  had  an  end.     Inftead  of 

S  reconciling 


0 
5 


(     I30     ) 

Chap.  IV„  reconciling  tliemfelvcs  to  employment,  they  rather  cliofe  to  pack 
off,  with  goods,  wives,  and  children,  leaving  Egypt,  in  order, 
by  cunning  and  fraud,  to  procure  an  eafier  fubfiftance  in  foreign 
countries.  They  purfued  this  fliameful  courfe  of  life,  through 
the  following  centuries,  and  have,  at  laft,  puflied  their  excurfions 
into   our  territories.    (29) 

It  is  not  enougli,  that  the  Egyptian  defcent  of  thefe  people 
is  entirely  deftitute  of  proofs,  but,  on  the  other  fide,  the  moft 
pofitive  proof  is  to  be  found,  to  contradi6l  it.  Their  language 
differs  (30)  entirely  from  the  Coptic,  and  their  cuftoms,  as  (31) 
Ahasuerus  Fritsch  has  remarked,  are  nothing  lefs  than 
Egyptian.  To  this  muft  be  added  that  weighty  circumftance,  of 
their  wandering  about  like  ftrangers  in  Egypt,  where  they  form 
a  diftinft  people;  as  not  only  (32)  Bellonius,  but  many  later 
(33)  writers  affure  us.  Therefore,  Muratori  is  not  in  the 
■wrong,  when  he  thinks  it  ridiculous  to  account  them  (34) 
Egyptians,  people  having  no  better  authority  for  this  belief, 
than  that  they  chofe  to  have  it  fo. 

Thus  it  {lands,  as  well  with  the  derivation  of  the  Gipfies  in 
general,  as  with  the  Egyptian  defcent  of  them  in  particular. 
AVhen  many,  and  among  thefe,  men  very  refpeftable  for  their 
learning,  declare  the  origin  of  thefe  people,  to  remain  an  unfolved 
riddle,  this  opinion  is,  I  think,  by  the  contents  of  tliis  and  the 
foregoing  chapter,  thoroughly  confirmed.  Notwithftanding  the 
innumerable  refearches,  the  -Gipfies  ftill  remain  an  unacknowledged 
inmate  in  Europe. 

I  have,  neverthelefs,  my  doubts,  whether  Swinburne  is  quite 
right,  in  ailerting  it  to  be  impoffible,  ever  to  find  (;^:;)    out    the 

real 


(   I^I    ) 

real  home  of  thefe  ftrangers.  I  venture,  though  not  without  Chap.  IV, 
apprehenfion,  on  account  of  the  unfuccefsful  endeavors  of  fo 
many  authors,  yet  not  entirely  without  hopes,  on  another  trial. 
Perhaps  I  may  be  fo  fortunate,  at  the  fame  time  to  flicw,  that  my 
doubts,  with  refpeft  to  Swinburne's  publication,  were  not  entirely 
without  foundation. 


CHAPTER       V. 

'Thi;    Gipfcs    come   from    Htndojlan. 

A  W  O  entire  ftrangers  will  be  able  to  know  each  other,  the 
moment  one  fpeaks  in  a  language  which  the  other  underftands. 
It  is  therefore  rightly  aflcrted  by  an  author,  that  it  would  be 
one  of  the  moft  Infallible  methods  of  afcertaining  the  origin  of 
thefe  people  with  certainty,  if  a  country  could  be  difcoverpd, 
where  their  language  was  in  common  ufe.  The  firft  and  mofb 
neceflary  examination,  here,  will  therefore  be  to  find  out  the 
country,  where  the  Gipfies  language  is  that  of  the  natives  :  and 
this  is  no  other  than  Hi  n  dost  an.  But  before  I  endeavor  to  prove 
it,  by  a  comparifon  of  the  Hindoftan  and  Gipfey  languages, 
I  muft  premife  fomething,  which  will  ferve  as  an  introduftion 
of  confiderable  weight.  It  is  a  piece  of  intelligence,  to  be  found, 
in  the  Vienna  Gazette,  and  comes  from  a  Captain  Szekely 
von  Dob  A,  a  man,  who  was  thinking  of  nothing  lefs,  than 
fearching  for  the  Gipfies  and  their  language  in  the  Eaffc 
Indies. 

S  a  Here 


C    132    ) 

•G!-rap.  V.         Here  it  is:     "  In  the  year  1763  on  the  6th  of  November," 

fays  Captain  (i)  Szekely,  "  a  printer  came  to  fee   me,  whofe 

jiame  was    Stephan    Pap    Szathmar   Nemethi.      Talking 

upon  various  fubjefts ;     we,   at  laft,  fell  upon  that  of  the  Gipfies : 

on  this  occafion,  my  gueft  related  to  me  the  following  anecdote, 

from  the  mouth  of  a  preacher  of  the  reformed  cliurch,  Stephen 

Vali,  at  Almafch    in  the  county  of  Komora.     When  the  faid 

Yali,  ftudied   at  the  Univerfity  of  Leiden,    he   was   Intimately 

acquainted  with  fome  young  Malabars,  of  which,  three  are  obliged 

conftantly  to    ftudy  there,  nor  can  they  return  home,    till  relieved 

by  three  others.      Having  obferved,   that  their   native    language 

bore  a  great   affinity  to    that   fpoken   by  the  Gipfies  ;     he  availed 

himfelf  of   the   opportunity,     to    note    down,    from    themfelves, 

upwards  of  one  thoufand  words,   together  with  their  fignifications. 

They  alTured  him,  at  the  fame  time,  that  upon  their  ifland,  was 

a  tracfl  of  land,   or  province,    called  Czigania    (but  it   is  not  laid 

down  on  the  map).     After  Vali  was  returned  from  the  Univerfity, 

he  informed  himfelf,  among  the  Raber  Gipfies,   concerning  the 

meaning  of  his   Malabar  words,     which  they  explained  wkhout 

trouble  or  hefitation." 

In  thii>  anecdote,  every  thing  feems  to  happen  by  chance; 
even  to  the  learned  man  who  publiflied  it  in  the  Gazette,  it 
appeared  as  if  fallen  from  the  clouds,  (2)  and  entirely  overfets 
his  fyflem ;  for  he  was  the  perfon,  mentioned  above,  who 
broached  the  opinion  of  the  Gipfies  being  Mongol  Tartars.  So 
m;ich  more  weighty,  therefore,  and  unexceptionable,  are  the  hints 
it  throws  out,  for  the  difcovery  of  the  Gipfies,  mother  country, 
by  means  of  their  language. 

That 


(     133     ) 

That  further,  according  to  this  anecdote,  the  Gipfey  language  Chap.  V» 
is  declared  to  be  Malabar,  and  I  have  pronounced  it  Hindoftan, 
does  not  create  any  difficulty,  although  they  are  very  different 
from  each  other.  Probably  the  three  young  men,  from  whom  Vali 
took  down  his  words,  were  Bramins  fons,  whofe  language  was 
that  proper  to  the  learned  Bramins,  or  the  Shanfcritt.  But 
the  affinity  between  this  and  the  common  language,  fpoken  by 
the  people  of  Hindoftan  is  the  fame  as  between  pure  Latin  and 
modern  Italian.  It  was  therefore  very  natural,  that  the  Raber 
Gipfies  fliould  underftand,  if  not  all,  at  leaft  the  greateft  part  of 
the  words,  which  Vali   repeated  to  them. 

Neverthelefs,  we  do  not  want  this  come  off.  The  difficulty 
will  fubfide  without  it,  when  I  come  to  examine  the  connexion 
between  the  Gipfey  and  Hindoftan  languages.  The  next  thing 
therefore,  is  to  give  a  lift  of  words  from  both. 

Here  follows    the    LIST: 

Numerals. 
Gipfey.  Hindoftan.  Englifli. 

M;  Ek  ■  Ek  One 

Duj;  Doj  Dk  Two 

■Trin;  I'ri  Tin  Three 

Schtari  Star  Tfchar  Four 

Pantfch;  Panfch  ^  Fanfch  Five 

Tfchowe;  Schow,  Sof  Tfcho  Six 

Eft  a  Heft  a;   Sat  Seven 

Ochto  Aute  Eight 

Knja;  Eija  Now  Nine 

Defch; 


(     '34     ) 

Chiip.  V.  Numerals. 

Gipfcy.  Hindoftan. 

Dcfch;  Des  Dos;  Dcs 

Befch;  Bifch;  Bis  Bjs 

Trianda;  Tranda  Tjs 

Starweldefch ;    Saranda  Tfchaljs 

Pantfchwerdefch;  ^       7  p.^f^hafs 

Panda  Pontfandis      ^ 
Tfchowerdefch;Schoandis  Sytt 

Eftawerdefch  Syttr 

Ochtovverdefch  Afleh 

Eijawerdefch ;  Enjandis  Nubbeh 

Tfchel;  Schel;  Sel  Souw 
Duifchel;  Delfchel 

Defchwerfchel;  Ekezeros  Ek bazar;  Hazar 
O  gluno  ;   a  jekto 
O  duito ;    a  duito 
O  Trlto 
O  Schtarto- 


Tziro 

Berfch 
.Manet  : 


Tichon 


Dizves 

Rall'i;  Rait  gin;  Rat 

Feizrile 


Pajla 
Dufera 

Xjfera 
Tfcharta 

Nouns   Substantive. 

Wakht 
Burz;  Sal 

Me'uia 
Hefta 
Dizv ;  Rafe 

Rat  eh 
Fazir ;  Nur 


EngllfiT.. 
Ten 

Twenty 

Thirty 

Forty 

Fifty 

Sixty 

Seventy 

Eighty 

Ninety 

Hundred 

Two  Hundred 

Thoufand 

Thefirft 

The  Second 

The  Third 

The  Fourth 

Time 
A  Year 
A  Month 
A  Week 
Day 
Night 
Morning: 


Ratti 


J  5 


NoL'NS    SuBSTATTVE. 

Gipfcy. 

Hindoftan. 

Englilli. 

Ratti 

Evcnins; 

Knrko 

Etwar 

Sunday 

Doga 

Tfchis 

An  Affair;  a  Thing 

Kak 

Tulad;  Rykem 

The  Sex 

Arti 

Zatt 

The  Sort 

Gofivro 

Gi<f!ur;  Moffikj 

The  Manner 

Jck;   Otter 

Tfchan;  Tukra 

A   Piece 

Gin 

Adadali 

The  Number 

Dewe;  Dewel;  Dexi'ol;! 

Khoda;  Allah 

God 

Dezda 

J 

Deuzv 

Dcuzv;  Muret 

An  Idol 

Bollopen;  Boliben 

Dune 

The  World 

Mulro 

Dumni 

The  Spirit 

Sie;  Wode 

Jan 

The  Soul 

Triipo;  Telchta 

Dhj;  Ang;  Hal 

The  Body 

Shwcto ;  Tlcherofz 

Behefcht;  Afman 

Heaven 

Tfer henj  e ;  Tfchef henj  a 

Tara 

A  Star 

dham ;  Ca>n  ;  Okam 

Kam;  Surez 

The  Sun 

.?cZ''o«;Tfchemut;Mrarchj 

I  Tfiband 

The  Moon 

Prabal 

How  ah 

The  Air 

Jag;  Jak;  Jage 

A? 

Fire 

Panj;  Panjo 

Panj 

Water 

Pu;  Bhu;Pube;  E] 

lebu 

Zemin 

The  Earth 

Balwal,  Bear 

Beiar;  Batas 

The  Wind 

Felhocfchnodi 

Baddel 

A  Cloud 

Felhelchinc 

Bjdfchelj 

Lightning: 

Tfchetogalch 

Chap.  V. 


Chap,  V. 


C    136    > 

Nouns    Substantive. 


Gipfey. 

Hindoftan. 

EngHfli. 

Tfchetogafch 

Meg 

Thunder 

Gwittrolo 

Jivve 

Snow 

Brifchint;  Brechinib 

Birrfat 

Rain 

Mrafcha;  Ofcb 

Kohaffa,- 

OJh 

The  Dew 

Jeko;  Paho 

Ice 

Koeddo 

Kohafla  ; 

Kohol 

Fog 

Temm 

Muluk 

The  Soil 

j^kra 

Maidan. 

The  Field 

Hedjo 

Pahr 

A  Mountain 

Bar 

Pytter;  Kaja 

A  Hillock 

Dombo 

A  Hillock 

Gere;  Wermo 

Gerrab 

A  Pit 

Wefch 

DjP 

An  Ifland 

Epas;  Wefch 

Peninfula 

Baro  Pani 

Deriauw 

The  Ocean 

Sero 

Dfchjl 

The  Sea 

Pleme 

A  Wave 

Kunara;  Parra 

Kinerj 

The  Shore 

Talo  Panj;  Pofchi 

Tfchata 

Morafs;  Slough 

Hani;  Foljafi 

Pohara 

A  Spring 

Hanj;  Hanik 

Hmh;  Koka 

A  Well 

Talk 

tallauzu 

A  Dike 

Flammus 

Tjhi;  Lu 

Flame 

Jangar;  Angar 

Koyla 

Coal 

Mommli;  Mvimeli' 

Batthj 

Light 

Schik 


c  137  ; 

Not'Ns    Substantive. 

Gipfey. 

Hindollan. 

Encrlifh 

0 

Schik 

Moil 

Mud 

Tlchar;  Djiplo 

Rag;  Bovvus 

Afhes 

Mefcho 

Tfcuna 

Chalk 

Bala 

Bull;  Rith 

Sand 

Bare;  Bar 

Sanka; 

Pytter 

Stone 

WahUn;  Tcheklo 

Beli'Ji 

Glafs 

Jegekoro  bar 

Patter 

Flint  ftonc 

Afchpin;  Homokori 

Whetftonc 

Sonnai;Sonmkey;  Sihom- 
■nakai 

" ' .  Suna 

Gold 

Rup 

Tzafter;  Trafcht 

Ruppa 
Luha 

Silver 
Iron 

Tfchino 

Kclley 

Tin 

MoUhvo 

Mulwa ; 

Sjfcha 

Lead 

Tzindo  rup 

Parrat 

Quickfilver 

Lohn;  Lori 

Nun 

Salt 

Lonkeren 

Sura 

Saltpetre 

Kandini  momelli 

Genden 

Sulphur 

Zhach;  Scha 

Herbs 

Char;  Tfchar;  Wira 

Gas 

Grafs 

Rozho 

Rye 

Jlv 

G'luw 

Wheat 

Gib;  Arpa 
Tzirja;  Pura 

Jou 
Ljfun 

Barley 
Garlick 

Purum;  Lolipurum 

Peiaz 

Onion 

Schach 

Kubj 

Cabbage 

trhap.  V. 


Hirhil 


Chap.  V. 


C     T58     ) 

Nouns    Substantive, 

Gipfey. 

Hindoftan. 

EngKfh. 

Hirhil 

Mytter 

Peas 

Dudum 

Hulla 

A  Gpurd 

Herbuzho 

Terbus 

A  Melon 

Boborka 

Blrka 

A  Cucumber 

Muri 

A  Strawberry 

Karro 

A  Thiftle 

Rftk 

Garfch 

A  Tree 

Balano  mako 

The  Oak 

Kirgifsakro  ruk 

A  Cherry  Tree , 

Pabuj 

Pazvug',  Sjuw 

An  Apple 

Brohl 

Prohlo 

A  Pear 

Kirgiffin 

A  Cherry 

Pehenda 

A  Nut 

Tc'lel 

Januwr 

ABeaft 

Kirmo 

Kentfchuwa.. 

A  Worm 

Rezh 

Rijfem 

Silk 

Birlin 

Mumukkj;  Sdjehetkj 

i  A  Bee 

Jerni 

Mum 

Wax 

Gwju;  Mefcho- 

Schahed 

Honey 

Kirja 

Kir  01  Tfchontj 

An  Ant 

Jua;  'tzua 

Juj 

A  Loufe 

Puzhum;  Pufchan 

Pjfche 

A  Flea 

Hai;  Karodi 

A  Crawfifli. 

Tzefniakro ;  Matfchii ;  |  ^^^^^y^i/i 

Fifli 

Matfcho;  Mulp, 

i 

Alo 

Bam 

An  Eel 

T/chririkU 


(     139     ) 


NouKs    Sui:stanti\t:. 

"Gipfey. 

Hindoftan. 

Engllih. 

Tfchirikli;  Tfchhiklo 

tfchuri 

A  Bird 

Tfchirikloro 

A  Small  Bird 

Wiknia 

A  Falcon 

Bifchothilo 

Ghido 

The  Eagle 

Papin;  Papim;  Papi 

Hans 

A  Goofe 

Hiretza;  Retfchori 

Buttush 

A  Duck 

"tovadei 

rubbuter,Tic\\QX.{d\V 

j  A  Dove 

Jaros;  Garum 

Unnda 

An  Egg 

Parae  Jari 

White  Eggs 

Baro  peng ;  Orofchlana 

Sjr;  Sjng 

The  Lion 

Matlchka;Gifterna;Stirna 

A  Cat 

Ru 

Bir'a;  Hundar 

A  Wolf 

Jukel ;  Tzukel; .  Juket;  ■ 

Tfchokel;  Schokel;  - 

Kuttha 

A  Dog 

Tfchikel 

Schofchi;  Tfihofcbai 

Sajfa;  Khurr 

A  Hare 

Papinori 

Bauer 

An  Ape 

Gra;  Grea;  KreJ 

Gorra;  Ghaffi 

A  Hoife 

Gratfch;  Grajl 

Gorra 

A  Stallion 

GrafnJ;  Grafckni 

Gorrj 

A  Mare 

Dernagrefch 

Batfcheru 

A  Foal 

Gurrub;  Gvsu;  Gitrni 

Gorna;   Boil 

An  Ox 

Guruni;  Kircumni;       ■ 
Gurongatfch              ! 

Giij;  Borjuko 

A  Cow 

Warjuhilo 

Batfchera 

T    2 

A  Calf 

Ba 

Chap-  V. 


C    140    ) 


Ckap.  V. 


Nouns    Substantive. 


Gipfey. 

Hindoftan. 

Englim, 

Baker  a;  Bakra;  Bakro 

Bhjra;  Bhjri 

J  A  Sheep 

Meudha;  Mendh: 

Bakero;  Bhara  dohWo 

Mendhj  batfcha 

A  Lamb 

IVakro;   Bakro; 

7 
V 

A  Wether 

Upritudlilom 

Jefchingingri ;  Ketfchka  Bukkrj 

A  Goat 

Bi'.kra 

A  He  Goat 

Bah;  Bala 

Pala;   Sur 

A  Swine 

Bikarifch  krohilo 

Stir 

A  Boar 

Ballitfchi;   Bali 

A  Sow 

Balora 

Surbatfcha 

A  Pig 

Djanba 

Beng;  Mendowk 

A  Frog 

r/ap 

Sarap 

A  Snake 

Beng 

Guddj 

A  Dragon . 

Kazht;  Karfcht 

Lakerj 

Wood 

Tfchjlka;  BorJca 

Tfchal 

The  Bark 

Patrin 

Fat 

A  Leaf 

Peperi 

Mirritz 

Pepper 

Bal;  Pal 

Bal 

The  Hair 

Puzhum 

Ojr 

Wool 

Pori 

Dum 

The  Tail 

Rat 

Lohu 

Blood 

Tid 

Dhud 

Milk 

Kjl 

Kel;  Mukken 

Butter 

Kiral;  Chiral;  Kkis 

Panjr 

Cheefe 

fuio. 

r/chjR 

Fat 

Sivii 


(     MI     ) 


Nouns    Substantiv 
Gipfey,  Hindoflan. 

Szva  Afifii 

Mas;  Mafz  Ghoft 

I'fchero;  Schero;  Cheru  Ser 
Aok ;  Jaok ;  Jaka;  Po;  Aran  Awk 
Kan  Kazan 

Nak  Nakk 

tfcham  Gal 

'fchammedun  Thori 

'tfchomni 

ffchor  Dharri 

Mut;  Moi  Mu 

Dam  Dant 

ffchib;   tfcheh  JM 

Men  Gerdhcn;  GiJla 

Dummo  Pitch 

Andririk  Terrik 

Gew;   Buhl  Tfchutter 

Keliii  Tfchatti 

Per  Pireh 

Mofiln;   Mucia  Bhan;  Hatch 

Waft;  Wafs  Hatch 

Kuzhilo;Guzhdo;  Giifto  Awngli 

Ghazdd;  Paltzo  Anguta 

Heroi  Tingeri 

2iro  Par;  Pauw 

Tfihajiga  Gunga 


E, 


Chap,  V. 


Englifl). 
A  Tear 
Flefti 

The  Head 
The  Eye 
The  Ear 
The  Nofe 
The  Cheek 
A  Slap  on  the  Face 
The  Chin 
The  Beard 
The  Mouth 
A  Tooth 
The  Tongue 
The  Neck 
The  Back 
The  Side 
The  Behind 
The  Breall 
The  Belly 
The  Arm 
The  Hand 
A  Finger 
The  Thumb 
The  Leg 
The  Foot 
The  Knee 

NaJ 


(     H^     ) 


Chnp.  v:. 


Nouns    Substantive, 

•Cipfey. 

Hindoftan. 

Englillu 

Naj 

Nouh 

A  Finger  Nail 

Sie;   Si 

Djl 

The  Heart 

Buko 

Sjiger 

The  Liver 

Buchlipen 

Jagga 

A  Place 

Rundo 

Nala 

A  Diftria 

Gel> 

Gibah;   Tfched 

A  Hole 

But;  Behjr 

Pot 

A  Multitude 

Pifta 

Toro 

A  Scarcity 

Lowe;  Lowe 

Peyffa 

Money 

Libra 

Sere 

A  Pound 

Kuni;  Kani 

An  Ell 

Jemia;  Miga 

Kofs 

A  Mile 

£uda;  Pumna 

Potdjm 

Age 

^fchiwawa 

Tiirju;  Ratbhah 

Life 

Rikewela 

Ehad 

The  Memory 

Sunjo 

Sunnj 

The  Hearing 

Sung 

Sunkh 

The  Smell 

Sik 

Tfchik 

The  Tafte 

Rakerpen;  Rakribenn   ^at;  Juvanj 
Tfchip                      3                            ' 

The   Speech 

Lab;   Alo 

Bat;  Kelam 

A  Word 

Nao;  Lawe 

Norn 

A  Name 

Liel 

Khutt 

An  Epiftl-e 

Buchos 

Ketab 

A  Book 

Schin 

Rengeh 

Color 

Schnablus 

The  bill  (of  a  Bird) 

Ptd; 

C     '43     ) 

Nouns    Substantive. 

Gipfey. 

Hindoftan. 

Englifh^ 

Pul;  Pos 

Pual 

Straw 

Baxt 

Bukktj 

Fortune 

Droninazhedum 

Aheb;  Tiffauti 

Error 

Sik 

Minet 

Diligence  - 

Mcrla 

Mordanj;  Mot 

Death 

Bkb 

Buk 

Hunger 

Truzhilo 

Peas 

Thirft 

Sentinella 

Para;   Tfchokkj 

Watching 

Sowawa 

Njn;  Khab 

Sleep 

Duk 

Dirk 

Smart 

Doko 

Dumm  • 

The  Breath 

Gha$ 

Kafsj 

A  Cough 

Butin 

Kar;  Kam- 

Labor 

Mufkatella 

Mekljm 

Balfam 

Tfchinneben 

Zukhmj  ;   Gatel 

A  Wound 

Ker 

Gurr;  Havelj 

An  Houfc 

^fchater;  Chor 

"Tfchaler 

A  Tent;   Roof. 

Gadfi 

Kajfi;   Juru 

A  Wife 

Tfchowo ;  Tfchabo 

Lirrka 

A  Child 

Tfche;  Tfchaj 

Tfchuknj  - 

A  Girl 

Tfchabe;    'Tfcbawo 

1'jchokna 

A  Boy 

Tfchek 

Tfcbekerm  -■ 

A  Virgin 

Rackljo 

A  Young  Man 

Kflcksji 

A  Young  T  .ady 

Dade;  Dadi 

Bab 

A  Father 

Dada;  Nana 

A  Grandfather 

Diap.  v. 


Daj; 


(      '44     ) 


Chap.  V. 


Gipfey, 
Daj  ;   Daju ;  Dajo 

Mami 

Tfchawo ;   Scliave 
Tfchaj ;   Scliaj 
Tlchakrorum 
Kako 

Dades  Krupral 
Dades  Kripen 
Pewli 
Veleto 
Rakli 
Wirthus 
Werda 
Sikerwawa 
Putzjum 
Pen 

Mangawa 
Schegari ;  Sidah 
Wezhefkro 
KclUpen 
Tfchilhiman 
Schetra 
1'fchorori 
Drum 

Jangujlri ;   Gojlrlng ; 
Gufdcrin 


Nouns    Substantive. 
Hindofian. 

Ma 

Beth 

Bethj 

Jamwatfch 

Tlche-tfclierabhais 

Tfchatfcha 

Tfchatfchi 

Rhenduj ;  Rand 

Noker;  Tfchakcr 

Tfchakeriii 

Gurkka-Suheb 

Seratfch;  Khara 

Talima 

Sowal 

Bjn ;    Jivab 

Urrizi 

Scheggar 
Kele;  Notfch 


Serinda 

Tfcbcrjji;  Konkatj 
Mufafferj 

Angtitri 


] 


Englifn. 
A  Mother 
A  Grandmother 
A  Son 
A  Daughter 
Son-in-law 
Coufin 

Father's  Brother 
Father's  Sifter 
A  Widow 
Man  Servant 
Maid  Servant 
A  Landlord 
An  Inn 

Learning;Inftru(ftion 
A  Queftion 
An  Anfwer 
A  Petition 
The  Chafe 
A  Huntfman 
A  Game 
A  Guitar 
A  Violin 
Poverty 
A  Voyage;  Journey 


A  Ring 


Tower ; 


Gipfey. 
Tower;  Tobcr 
Pal 
Bechari 

Tfchupn't 

Tfchor 

tfchordas 

Goro ;   Chaduin 

Pleiflerdum 

Tfchatfcho 

Pan ;  Birdcv 

Tchumoben 

Dori 


(     H5    ) 

Nouns   Svbstantive, 
Hindoftan. 
Kulhari 
Mes,   Tukhta 
Piala;   Tfchasj 
Tfcbabuld 
Tfchur 
1'fchurj 
Dhoro;  Krjs 
Mafuri 
Jnfaf;  Sjera 


Chap.  \\ 


,     Englim. 
An  Ax;   A  BiU 
A  Board 
A  Cup. 
A  Whip 
A  Thief 
A  Theft    ■ 
A  Sword ;  Dagger 
A  Reward 
Right 


Bharr;Birz;74\\mm3.  Weight;  Burthen 


^fckuma 
Sutlj;  Fjtha; 


Manru;   Maro;   MaUim  Rutj 

Jaro;  Aro  Ata;  Moidda 

Gaben 

Kjl 

Rdjii;  Rajah 

Ranj 

Raz 

Buklo 

Kuroben;  iCugriben 

Kutwnafkro 

Kuromangri 

Ritteri 

Harrai 

Pufchka;  Baiiduk 


AKife 

A  Band 

Bread 

Meal 

Food;  Eatables 

Butter 
TheLord;ThePrince 

The  Princefs 

The  Principality 

ACaflle 

War 
Gardj;  Tfcholdar     A  Warrior;  A  Soldier 

Infantry 

Cuiraffiers 
Hattiar  A  Brcaftplate 

Sanduk  A  Muiket 

U  Gmuzv^, 


Konna 

Mukken 

Raja 

Raji 

Raz;  Surdarl 

Koluff 

Jungro 


(     146     ) 


Xhap.  V. 


Nouns  Substantive. 

Gipfey. 

Hindoftan. 

Englifli. 

I        J 

Gaue;  Gal;  Jegag 

Gauw;  Bufti 

AVillage;AHamlet 

'tombuH 

1'umbur 

A  Drum 

Kandini   momelli 

Gendett 

Brimftone 

nu 

Dhuah 

Smoak 

Paka 

Bofu 

The  Wing 

Palmande 

Mufaka 

The  Rear 

Romm;  Manufch; 

cMurd;   Manufch; 
t       Adaml 

'.    Man,  Mankind 

Gadze 

Jammadar 

Surrdar 

Commander 

Wefch 

Jungel 

A  Wood ;  Foreft 

Jagari;  Wezhifkro 

A  Forefter 

Klufturi 

Takkor  bar 

A  Cloifter 

Kangri;  Kangheri 

Mufizam 

A  Church 

Ijha 

Ifchba;  Kuterj 

Apartment;Chamber 

Skaurnin 

Tfchukire 

A  Chair 

Kambana 

Guiitha  Ghittal 

A  Bell 

Gowr 

Kibr 

The  Grave 

Doga 

Tfchjs 

The  Matter 

Nani  kek 

Quotfch-netlch 

Nobody- 

Schvit 

Sirrka 

Vinegar 

Ker;  Baua 

Havelj  ;  Emarat 

An  Edifice 

Klidin 

Tfchabj;  Kill 

A  Key 

Bangoklidin 

Picklock 

GuUub;  Chalu;  Kalfchis 

Breeches 

Schofte 

Petfchamma 

Drawers 

Jioro 

Kurti 

A  Coat 

Kuni 


C     H7     ) 


Nouns   Substative, 

Gipfe)'. 

Hindoftan. 

EngUni. 

Kmi 

Map;  Kejafa 

A  Mcafure 

Kutiah 

^  A  Corner 

Schukkerben 

"  Beauty 

Kutfchahu 

Kitfeh 

Potter's  Clay 

Brija 

Soup 

Goji 

Goig 

A  Saufage 

Mol 

Angiir;   Schrab 

Wine 

Gereta 

Karamitti 

Chalk 

$apuni 

Savin 

Soap 

Kammawa 

Guna 

Accufation;  Debt 

Gono 

Kifla              ..i>y  A 

A  Knapflick 

Por ;  For 

Purr;  For 

A  Feather 

Madjho;  Matzlin 

Mudkj 
Adjectives. 

A  Fly 

Schoker 

Jflekta;   Hakabat 

Refpedable 

Puro 

Pur  ana ;   Buda 

Old 

Dumino 

Pagia 

Simple 

Prinjerdo 

Tfchinta 

Known 

Nango 

Nenga 

Bare 

Nanilalfchj  Erio 

Budd;  Khrab 

Wicked 

Bulhaila 

Tfchaura 

Broad 

Duber-y   Aduito 

Duara 

Double 

Sam 

Schano;  Pittla 

Thin 

Tfchori  ropen 

Kambvikht 
U  a 

Miferable 

Chap.  V, 


(      h8     ) 


Cho.p.  V. 


Adjectives. 

Gipfey. 

Hindoftan. 

£nglifh. 

JJeBn 

Ekara 

Single 

Tfchimafter 

Netko;  Kemed 

Eternal 

Latfchila;  Wingro 

Juta 

Falfe 

Tanilo 

Nerafla 

Dark 

Piro 

Kalafcli 

Free 

Zelo 

Sumutfcha 

Entire 

£aro 

Burra 

Great 

Latfcho 

Bala 

Good 

Tfchorero 

Budd-/Krfit 

Ugly,   Hateful 

Pral 

Unfcha 

High 

Boko 

Buka 

Hungry 

Bango 

Benka;  Tera 

Crooked 

tikno ;   Tigno 

Tengna 

Short 

Bango 

Lingra;  Afrara 

Lame 

Lokes ;   Bctfchuker 

Djla  ;  Derrtfchka 

Slow 

Sorb 

Jeura 

Powerful 

Kindo 

Binga 

Wet 

Neva 

Naia 

New 

Barwello 

Matwir;  Talivirr 

Rich 

JCalo;   Kala 

Kala;  Sjah 

Black 

Mitfchach 

Tik 

Severe 

Bharahib 

Barri 

Heavy 

Gudlo 

Mitha 

Sweet 

Gar 

Gehera 

Deep 

Merla;  Mojas 

Mua;  Whakka 

Dead 

Schukrohik 

Snkka 

Dry 

Gojemen 

(     149     ) 


Adjectives. 

Gipfey. 

Hindoftan. 

EngUHi. 

Gojemen 

Kuffa 

Arrogant 

But 

Bot ;     Fatta 

Much 

Perdo 

Piirra ;    Bharra 

Full 

MalTob 

Kaberdar 

Watchful 

Tfcha 

Sutfcha 

True 

Tatco ;     Tatip 

Gorm 

Warm 

Parna 

Saffed;     Vjela 

White          '    •';; 

Diir 

T'fchaura 

Far 

Nanelefkekfi 

Tichimmero 
Verbs. 

Tough 

Riokerwawa 

Mul-kurrna 

To  efteem 

Wias 

Pontfchna 

To  arrive 

Kovokardas 

Luggauna 

To  entice 

Tfchindas 

Schina-kunm 

To  charge 

Pekgum 

TzmhmmQ-pvMaHiia 

To  bake 

Tfchjl 

Hjlna 

Tofhake 

Mangawa 

Mangna 

To  beg 

Gohena 

C  Bjramet-kurrna; 

Ito  cheat 

\     Daha  kurrna 

s 

Catfchole 

It  burns 

Pakjum 

Turauna 

To  break 

Bandopen 

Bandna 

To  bind 

Lubekirdaspas 

Zanakarikurrna 

To  commit  adultery 

Pral 

Derkarhuna 

To  be  poor 

Pretterdvim 

Dantna 

To  threaten 

'tfchcrodi& 

Chap.  V. 


C    ^50    ) 


Chap.  V. 


Verbs. 

Gipfey. 

Hindoftan. 

Englifh, 

'Tfcherodia  ftele 

S'lr-k.z.tra 

To  behead 

Ferdo 

Tchukauna;  Bhunna 

:  To  accompllfh 

Stildum 

Pukkerna;  Bojena 

To  feize 

Gana;  Kha;  Chabben;  Hane.  Kauna 

To  eat 

Androflafter  kordo 

Zinjir;  Luggauna 

To  fetter 

Nafch 

Tfchpjia 

To  flow 

Jarawe 

I  fear 

Jirrna ;  Dirrhuna 

To  fear 

Mutenvaxi'a 

Mutna 

To  make  water 

Bango 

Lingra  huna 

To  halt  (go  lame) 

Getfchaha 

Jauna 

To  go  any  where 

Gkas 

Kajft  kurrna 

To  cough 

Nazh 

Schegar-kurrna 

To  hunt 

Kindjelle 

Mul-lena 

To  buy 

Tfchiimauna 

To  kifs 

TfchumeMe 

She  kifTes 

Savva 

Huflna 

To  laugh 

Muk 

Mukhfet  Aawrrna. 

To  leave 

Schiwawa;  Befchefch 

Jjna 

To  live 

Tfcharawa 

Tfchatna 

To  lick 

Deletfchedomaii 

Sulah-huna 

To  lie  down 

Gochoben 

Jut  bolena 

To  lye 

Kerla 

Kurrna 

To  make 

Slwawa 

Siwena 

To  few 

Lawa 

Lena;  Pukkerna 

To  take 

Nabe 

Nomdena 

To  name 

Tfchi-kurrna 

(     151     ) 


Verbs. 

Gipfey. 

Hindoftan. 
Tfchi-kurrna 

Engliai. 
To  fneeze 

Tfchikatek 

He  fneezes 

Barrejlro 

Barretfch-\Mxm7i 

To  boaft 

Sennelowifa 

Djwana  huna 

To  be  mad ;  to  rave 

Blrrfna 

To  rain 

Dias  brifchendo 

It  did  rain 

Zhiturjua 

Ginna;  Tikna 

To  reckon 

Tfatfchoben 

Jnfaf  dena 

To  right  one 

Songawa;   Sung 

Sunkhna;  Bokiirrna 

,    To  fmell 

Pennawa 

Kabena;  Bolena 

To  fay- 

Tfchinnawa 

Karat  kurrna 

To  faw 

Giuwazva 

Guwena 

To  fing 

Limmaugi 

Kurrauna 

To  provide 

Zamander;  Zhafwawer 
Kinder 

' ' .   Judda  kurrna 

To  divide 

Zhinger 

Galljdena 

To  fcold 

Karj 

Urauna 

To  fhoot 

Kuroben 

Kaffa  kurrna 

To  flay 

Bezhawna;  Bezh 

Bahetfia 

To  fit 

tfchor 

Tfchure  kurrna 

Tofleal 

Mujas;  Miilo 

Muena 

To  die 

Mongna 

Duntena 

To  feek 

Hitfchazva;  Lejatina 

Lena 

To  carry 

Luno 

Zumma  kurrna 

To  marry 

Kurobtn 

Marna 

To  meet 

Piava;  Pi 

Plena 

To  drink 

Chap.  V. 


Puro 


■Chip,.  V. 


C    15a    ) 

Verbs. 

Gipfey. 

Hindoftan. 

Engllfh, 

Piro 

JPuraim 

To  grow  obfolete^ 

Latiakerjl 

Benfchna 

To  iell 

Tfchhma 

To  know 

Me  tfchana 

I  know 

Tzawari 

Jadu  kurrna 

To  bewitch. 

Dekkna 

To  fee 

Me  dikkaba 

I   faw 

Sitna 

To  hear 

'Nefchunek 

I  do  not  hear 

Example  1 

liow   the  two  Languagi 

es  decline. 

I.       Without  being  joined    with    an   Adjeftive,, 

Singular    Number. 

I.  Gadzo 

Adami 

A  Man 

2.  Gzdzejlero 

Adam//'tf 

Of  the  Man. 

3.  GadzyXa 

Adzmiko 

To  the  Man 

4.  Gadzo 

Adam/;  Adam/j^i9 

The  Man 

5.  0  Gadzo 

0  Adami 

0  Man 

6.  Gzdzejlar;  Gadzefe 

Ad-Ami fe 

from,  with  the  Mam 

Plural    Number. 

» 

I.  Gadze 

Adamjo« 

Men 

2.  Gadze«^fro 

Ad2iVn]onka 

Of  the  Men 

3.  Gndzengo 

Adzmpnko 

To  the  Men 

4.  Gadze 

Adamjfl/7;  Adamjci«X'6 

;  The  Men 

5.  0  Gadze 

0  Adamjo« 

OMen 

6^  G^dzcndar;  Gadzen_/^  Adamjonfe 

from,  with  the  Men, 

Singular 

(     153     ) 

Singular    Number. 

Gipfey. 

Hindoftan. 

Englifh. 

I. 

Kafidi 

Mes 

The  Table 

2. 

Knfidjakero 

Meska 

Of  the  Table 

J' 

Kafidj  (?/(•? 

Mes/'o 

To  the  Table 

4- 

Kafidi 

Mes;   Mesy^o 

The  Table 

5- 

O  Kafidi 

OMes 

O  Table 

6. 

KuMjater;  Ki 

afidiy^       Mesfe 

Plural    Number, 

from,  with  the! 

I. 

Kafidja 

Mefe 

The  Tables 

2. 

Kafidja/(Yro 

MeCcka 

Of  the  Tables 

0' 

Kafidjen^^ 

Mekko 

To  the  Tables 

4- 

Kafidja 

Mefe             ^     ' 

The  Tables 

5- 

O  Kafidja 

O  Mefe 

O  Tables 

Chap,  V. 


6.  Kafidjem/trrj  Ka.Mja.fe  Mefey^ 


from,witlj  thcTables 


1.  Baru  bale 

2.  Bari  balis 

3.  Bari  balis 

4.  Ban.1  balis 

5.  O  Baru  balis 


2.      With  an  Adjeftive. 

Singular   Number. 

Burra  fi^ir 
Burra  (vska 
Burra  {urko 
Burra  fiir 
O  burra  fur 


6.  Bari  haViJier;  hsUisfe     Burra  Curfe 


The  great  Hog 
Of  the  great  Hog 
To  the  great  Hog 
The  great  Hog 
O  great  Hog 

f  from,  with  the  great 

i     Hog 

Plural 


Chap.  V. 


Plural    Number 

Gipfe}'. 

Hindoftan. 

I. 

Baiu  balen 

Burre  fure 

2. 

Bari  balen 

Burre  (urel-a 

Bari  balen 

Burre  (ureko 

4- 

Baru  balen 

Burre  fure 

5- 

O  baru  balen 

O  Burre  fure 

Englifli. 
The  great  Hogs 
Of  the  great  Hogs 
To  the  great  Hogs 
The  great  Hogs 
O  great  Hogs 

6.  Bar  balen^^r;  hahnfe    Burre  fure/e  l         '  "^    ' 

i     Hogs 

Remark  I.  Thofe  fyllables,  which  in  the  oblique  cafes  are 
printed  in  Italics,  are  the  article.  In  the  Gipfey,  as  well  as 
in  the  Hindoftan  language,  they  do  not  place  the  article 
before  the  noun,  but  affix  it  behind,  and  that  is  the  fole 
indication  of  the  cafe  of  a  noun.  In  the  Gipfey  tongue,  the 
article  of  the  nominative  cale  is  O  or  I ;  in  the  Hindoftan, 
A  or  I. 

'Remark  II.  The  Gipfey  language,  as  -well  as  the  Hindoftan, 
has  only  two  genders,  the  mafculine  and  feminine.  Thofe 
nouns  which  end  in  I,  are,  in  both  languages,  feminine, 
and  all  the  reft  mafculine.  Both  languages  change  the 
mafculine  into  the  feminine  gender,  by  putting  an  j  for  the 
termination.     For  Example, 

Gipfey,  R^ja?  the  Prince.     Ranj,  the  Princefs 

Jlindojiiiii,       Raja,  Raji 

Some 


(     15s     ) 

Some  Prokocns. 

I. 

I  :     Mc ;     Me, 

Mo. 

Singular    Number. 

Gipfey. 

Hindoftan. 

Englifli. 

r.  Me    . 

Me;   Mo 

I 

2.  Mrohi;    Man 

Mcrra;  Meika 

Of  me 

3.  Mange;  Man   . 

Mejko 

To  me 

4.  Mange;  Man 
* 

Mejko 

Me 

6.  Mander. 

Mejfe 
Plural    Number. 

from  Me 

I.  Amen;  Men 

Humm 

We 

2.  Amerohi 

Hunimarra;  Hum 

ka  Of  us 

3.  Amenge ;  Men-. 

Hummko 

To  us 

4.  Amen ;  Men 

Humraare;  Humko  Us 

Chap.  V, 


6.  Amendar;Amender;  7    tt         r 
Amenfe ;   Menfe       3 


from,  with  U= 


2.         Thou :     Tu ;     Tu. 
Singular  Number. 


I.  Tu 

Tu 

Thou 

2.  Trohi;  Tute  • 

Terra 

Of  Thee 

3.  Tuke ;  Tute 

Tuko 

To  Thee 

4.  Tutte;    Tut 

Tufko 

Thee 

5.  0  Tu 

0  Tu 

OThou 

6.  Tutarhi ;  Tuter 

Tufe 

From  I'hee 

U-a-- 

Vlvral  ■■■ 

(     156    ) 
Chap.  V.  Plural    Number. 


GIpfey. 

Hindoftan. 

Englilh. 

I.  Tumen;  Tume 

Turn 

You 

2.  Tumarohi;  Tumende 

Tumarra 

Of  You 

3.  Tumengole;  Tumcn 

Tumko 

To  You 

4.  Tumen ;  Tume 

Tumarre 

;  Tumko 

You 

5.  0  Tume 

OTum 

0  You 

6.  Tumendar;  Tumen 
der;  Tumenfe 

] 

Tumfe 

From,  with  You 

3- 

a. 

He: 

Job; 

Uweh. 

S; 

INGULAR 

Number. 

I.  Job 

Uweh 

He 

2.  Lefte 

Jffika 

Of  Him 

3.  Las 

Jffiko 

To  Him 

4.  Les 

* 

Jffiko 

Him 

6.  Lefter;  Leha 

Jffife 

From,  with  Him 

3- 

b. 

She: 

Joi; 

Uwehi 

S 

INGULAR 

Number 

I.  Joi 

Uwehi 

She 

2.  Lati 

Uika 

Of  Her 

3.  La 

Ufko 

To  Her 

4.  La 

Ulko 

Her 

6.  Later;  Laha 

Ufife 

From,  with  Her 

Plural 

(     '57    ) 

Plural  Number,    common  to    both   Genders. 

Gipfey.  Hindoftan.  Englifh. 

1.  Jole  Jnne  They 

2.  Lente  Jnneka  Of  Them 

3.  Len  Jnneko  To  Them 

4.  Len  Jnne  Them 


Chap.  V. 


6.  Lender 

Jnnefe                         From  Them 

4- 

My         Miro ;         Merra 

t 

Miri ;          Merri 

- 

Mafculine. 

Feminine. 

Mafculine.         Feminine. 

» 

I  Miro 

Miri 

Merra              Merri 

My 

2  Meri 

Merraka          Merrika 

Of  My 

3  Merige 

Merrako          Merriko 

To  My 

4  Merige 

Merra              Merri 

My 

5  0  Miro 

0  Miri 

0  Merra           O  Merri 

0  my 

6  Merider 

Merrafe           Merrife 

From  my 

5.  Our 

Maro                Humarra 

Mari                Humarri 

Singular     Number. 

I  Maro 

Miro 

Hummarra      Hummarri 

Our 

2  Mari 

Hummaraka    Hummarika 

Of  Our 

3  Marige 

Miro 

Hummarrako  Hummarriko  To  Our 

4  Marige 

Hummarra      Hummarri 

Our 

5  0  Maro 

OMari 

0  Hummarra  O  Hummarri 

1  0  Our 

6  Marider 

Hummarrafc    Hummarrife 

FiOin  Our 

6  Thy 

V    '58     ) 


£iwp.  v.. 


Gipfey. 

Hiiidoftan. 

Englim. . 

6.  Thy 

Tiro 

Terra 

Tiri 

Terri 

Singular 

Number. 

Mafcul'me. 

Feminine 

.    Mnfculriie. 

Feminine, 

I  Tiro 

Tiri 

Terra 

Terri 

Thy 

2  Tcri 

Terraka  , 

Terri  ka 

Of  Thy 

3  Terige 

Terrako 

Terriko 

To  Thy 

4  Terige. 

Terra 

Terri 

Thy 

5  O  Tiro 

O  Tiri 

0  Terra 

0  Terri 

OThy 

6  Terider 

Terrafe. 

Terrife 

From,  withThy 

Terife 

• 

7.  Your 

Tumaro 
Tumari 
Singular 

Tummarra 
Tumniarri 

Number. 

T  Tumaro      Tumari     Tummarra      Tummarri        Your 

2  Tumari  Tummaraka    Tujnmarrika   Of  Your 

3  Tumarigc  Tummarrako   Tummarriko   To  Your 

4  Tumarige  Tummarra  ■      Tummarri       Your 

5  OTumaro   OTumari  O  Tummarra  O  Tummarri  O  Your 

6  Tumarider  •  Tuaamarrafe    Tumrnarife    From,vvith  your 

Tumarife 

8/  Who?  Kobn  Gipfey;     Koun  Hindoftan. 

Examples  of  the   conjugation   of  both   languages. 

I, am:    Me    Horn;    Me  Hej 

PRESENT. 

Singular     Number. 

Mafculine,  .  Feminine.  ,  Mafculine,  .  Feminine. 

McHom;Kom;Sinjom  MeHej;MemHu;  Hota.  Hoti;  lam 

TuHal;  Sinjel  TyHej;TemHae;  Hota.  Hoti;  Thou  art 

Job  Hi;  Si  VwehHejjWoHae;  Hota.  Hoti;  He  is 

Pj-URAL  , 


(     »59     ) 

Glpfey.  Hincloftan. 

Plural     Numker, 
Miifiidlne.     Femimnc.  Mafcnline.  Feminine. 

MenHam;  Sinjam;    HumHei;HamHaem;Hotc.  Hotia;  We  are 
TumeHam;  Sinjan ;    Turn  Hej ;  Tom  Ho ;  Hote.   Hotia ;  Ye  are 
.  Jole  Hi ;       Sinja ;      Jnne  Hei;  We  Haem;.  Hote.  Hotia;  They  are 


Englifli.       Chap.  ;V. 


TMe  Hames ; 
Tu  Hales; 
Job  Has; 


Men  Hames 
Tume  Hames 
Jole  Has 


Me  Sinjomahi: 
Tu  Sinjalahi 
Job  Sinja 


Men  Sinjamahi 
Tume  Sinjanahi 
Jole  Sinje 


IMPERFECT. 

Singular     Number. 
MeHua;    Mem  T  ha. 
Tu  Hua ;  Tern  Tha . 


Thi ;    1  was 
Thi;     ThouwaJl 


UwehHua;   Woh  Tha.    Thi;     He  was 

Plural     Number. 

Hum  Hue;  Ham  The.    Thia;  We  were 
Turn  Hue;  Tom  The.   Thia;  Ye  were 
InneHue;  We  The.    Thia;  They  were 

PERFECT. 

Singular    Number. 
Me  Huatha  I  have  been 

Tu  Huatha  Thou  haft  been 

Uweh  Huatha  He  hath  been 

Plural    Number. 

Hum  Huathe  We  have  been 

Tum  Huathe  Ye  have  been 

.  Jnne  Huathe  They  have  been 

FUTURE, 


.     (     i6o     ) 

Chap.  V.  Gipfey.  Hindoftan.  Englifli, 

F  U  T  U  R'  E. 
Singular     Number. 
Me  Owa  Me  Huga  I  Hiail  be 

Du  Oweha  Tu  Huga  Thou  fhak  be 

Job  Ula  Uweh  Huga  He  fhall  be 

Plural     Number. 
Men  Owaha  Hum  Huge  We  fliall  be 

Tume  Una  Turn  Huge  Ye  fhall  be 

Jole  Owena  Jnne  Huge  They  fhall  be 

INFINITIVE. 
Huna  To  be 


To  make  ;     do ;  Kerja ;     Kurrna. 

PRESENT. 
Singular     Number. 


Me  Kerel 
Tu  Kerefch 
Job  Kerel 


Me  Kurrta 
Tu  Kurrta 
Uweh  Kurrta 


I  make 
Thou  makefk 
He  maketh 


Scho  Kerjem 
Tumen  Kerjen 
On  Kerde 


Plural     Number. 

Hum  Kurrte  We  make 

Tum  Kurrte  Ye  make 

Jnne  Kurrte  They  make 

IMPERFECT 


<     j6i     ) 

Gipfey.  Hindoftan,  Englifh.  Chap,  V. 

IMPERFECT. 

Singular     Number.  -  ■ 

Me  Kerjom  Me  Kurrtacha  I  did  make 

Tu  Kerjel  Tu  Kuntatha  Thou  didft  make 

O  Kerje  Uweh  Kurrtatha  He  did  make 

Plural     Number. 

Seho  Kerjom  Hum  Kurrtathe  We  did  make- . 

Tumen  Kerjea  Turn  Kurrtathe  Ye  did  make 

On  Kerde  June  Kurrtathe .  They  did  make 

The  comparifon  thus  far  will,  I  believe,  be  fufficient  to  convince    ' 
every  one  of  the  truth  of  the  pofitlon,  that  the  Gipfey  language  is 
really  that  of  Hindoftan.     Let  the  reader  look  over  the  catalogue 
once  more,  and  it  will  appear,  on  the  average,  that  every  third '. 
Gipfey  word  is  likewife  an  Hindoftan  one,  or  ftill  more,  out  of 
thirty  Gipfey  words,  eleven  or  twelve  are  conftantly  of  Hindoftan. 
This  agreement  is  uncommonly  great;  it  muft  alfo  be  remembered, 
that  the  words  above  communicated,  have  only  been  learned  from 
the  Gipfies,    within  thefe    very    few  years ;    confequently,    at  a 
fcafon,    when  they  had  been  near  four  compleat  centuries  away 
from  Hindoftan,  their  native  country,  (as  I  may  now  aflert    it  to 
be)  among  people  who  talked  languages  totally  different,  and  in 
which  the  Gipfies  themfelves  converfed.     Under  the  conftant,   and 
fo  long  continued,    influx  of  thefe   languages,    their   own  muft  \ 
neceffarily  have  fuffered  great  alteration,  more  efpecially  as  they  are 

Y.  a  people,  , 


(     i63     ) 

Chap.  V.  a  people,  entirel}^  raw,  without  either  writing  or  literature  .  One 
word  after  another  muft  have  crept,  from  the  others,  into  their 
-language,  confequently,  by  the  frequent  ufe  of  foreign  words, 
the  Gipfey  word,  of  the  fame  fignification,  was  more  rarely  ufed, 
and  by  degrees  entirely  loft  from  their  recoUeftion  :  by  which 
circumftance  the  original  compofition  of  their  language  became 
entirely  deranged  ;  (3)  which  is  the  reafon,  why,  as  any  body 
may  convince  themfelves  by  infpeftion,  all  kinds  of  languages  and 
idioms,  Turkifli,  Grecian,  Latin,  Wallachian,  Hungarian, 
Sclavonian,  German,  and  others,  make  part  of  the  above  voca- 
bulary. The  word  Rome,  Man,  is  Coptick  with,  perhaps,  a 
few  more.  It  does  not  appear,  that  there  is  fo  much  Perfian,  in 
the  Gipfey  language,  as  has  been  generally  imagined  ;  and  even 
•what  there  is  of  it  they  may  have  brought,  with  them,  from 
their  native  country  ;  as  many  Perfian  words  are  current  in  Hin- 
■doftan. 

After  all  thefe  reflexions,  we  ought  rather  to  wonder,  that  the 
number  of  Hindoftan  words  Is  fo  great,  in  the  Gipfey  language, 
than  to  reqviire  it  fhould  be  larger,  in  order  to  furnilbv  fufficient 
proof,  of  the  Hindoftan  lauguage  being  the  Gipfies  mother 
tongue. 

But  we  have  a  right,  from  the  agreement  which  appears  in 
the  catalogue  publifhed,  to  conclude  there  is  a  much  greater  in 
faft.  I  have  always  hitherto,  only  adopted  the  idea,  that,  among 
the  Gipfey  words  quoted,  all  thofe,  of  the  Hindoftan  language, 
appear,  which  are  ftill  extant  in  the  Gipfey  language,  anfwering 
to  the  annexed  meaning.  But  I  am  convinced  this  is,  by  no 
means  the  cafe.     It  may  be  recolleded,  from  the  firft  part,  how 

much 


C    '63    ) 

m\Kh  the    Gipfies    make  a  fecret    of  their   language,  and  how     Chap.  V. 

fufpicious  they  are,  when  any  body  wifhes  to  learn  a  few  words  of 

it.     Even  if  he  is  not  perverfe,  he  is  very  inattentive,  for  which 

reafon  he    is  likely   to  anfwcr  fome   other    rather   than  the  true 

Gipfey  (4)   word.     Under  fuch  cirumftanccs,  it  is  very  poffible  , 

nay  even  probable,  that  in   the  foregoing    catalogue,  there  may 

many    words   be  inierted,  inftead   of   which,  true  Gipfey,  confe- 

quently  Hindoflan  words  might  be  found,  but  that  the  Giplies, 

when  enquired  of,  either  from  levity  or  by  defign,  did  not  declare 

them. 

Further,  it  is  not  at  all  abfurd  to  pronounce,  that  there 
remain  more,  or  at  leaft  different,  true  Gipfey  words,  among 
thofe  refiding  in  one  country  than  another.  Now  if,  at  any  future 
period,  fome  perfon  lliould,  by  way  of  an  experiment  on  the 
above  catalogue,  examine  a  fecond  or  third  time,  different  fets 
of  Gipfies,  in  different  countries,  and  compare  the  refult  with 
thofe  already  delivered,  the  catalogue  would,  certainly,  receive 
a  confiderable  augmentation  of  Hindoftan  Gipfey  words. 

Finally,  we  muft  look  back  a  little  upon  the  Hindoftan  lan- 
guage itfelf.  This,  it  is  true,  is  fundamentally  the  fame,  all  over 
Hindoftan :  but  like  every  other  language  in  the  world,  has 
different  dial  efts,  according  to  the  different  provinces.  The 
eaftern  dialect,  fpoken  about  the  Ganges,  has  different  names  for 
fome  things,  and  different  inflexions  of  fome  words,  from  the 
weftern  one  talked  about  the  Indus.  There  is,  befides,  a  third 
varying  from  both  thefe,  viz.  the  Surat  dialed,  which,  has  a 
number  of  Malabar  and  other  words  (5)  mixed  with  it.  To  this 
muft  be  j,dded,  that  in  the  Hindoftan,  as  well  as  in  ever}'  other 

Y  2  language, 


.(      f64     ) 

Chap.  V.  language,  there  are  feveral  names  for  the  fame  thing.  The 
particular  dialeft,  bearing  the  clofeft  affinity  to  the  Gipfey  lan- 
guage, as  will  appear  hereafter,  is  the  weftern,  and  perhaps  more 
efpecially  that  of  Surat.  (6)  Had  this  therefore,  or  the  weftern 
one  in  general,  been  the  ftandard  of  the  above  comparifon,  and  1 
had  not,  for  want  of  words  in  thcfe  dialefts,  been  obliged  very 
much  to  have  recourfe  to  the  eaftern  one,  fpoken  in  Bengal;  or 
had  we,  even  in  this  diakft,  had  fuch  plenty  of  words,  that, 
.where  the  Gipfey,  from  not  knowing  any  more,  could  only  givt; 
us  a  fmgle  expreffion,  we  might  have  been  able  to  produce,  not 
•one  or  two  as  at  prefent,  but  all  or  at  leaft  the  greateft  part  of  the 
fynonymous  appellations;  we  fliould  infaUlbly  in  this  manner, 
-recover,  in  the  Hindoftan  language  many  a  Gipfey  word,  which 
•even  the  learned  are  unable  to  derive  from  the  European,  or  any 
•other  language,  and  yet  have  as  little  appearance  of  being  Hin- 
doftan. With  refpeft  to  the  conftrudlion,  and  inflexions  of  the 
two  languages,  they  are  evidently  the  fame.  That  of  Hindoftan 
has  only  tw-o  genders,  the  Gipfey. the  fame.  In  the  former  every 
■word  ending  inj  is  feminine,  all  the  reft  mafculine;  in  the  latter 
it  is  the  fame.  That  makes  the  inflexions  entirely  by  the  article, 
and  adds  it  to  the  end  of  the  word,  the  Gipfey  language  proceeds 
exaftly  in  the  fame  manner.  Finally,  likewife,  bating  a  trifling 
variation,  this  identical  fimilarity  is  evident  in  the  pronouns. 

So  much  for  the  language  of  the  Gipfies.  As  this  is  indubitably 
Hindoftan,  it  would  be  fufficientof  itfelf,  to  prove  the  defcent  of 
thoie  people  from  Hindoftan.  We  ftiall  now  proceed  to  other 
grounds,  which,  united  with  the  proofs  from  the  language,  will 
ieave  us  lefs  reafon  to  doubt,  concerning  this  matter. 

That 


X     165    )  Chap.  V. 

That  the  Giplies,  and  natives  of  Hindoflan,  refemble  pcli 
other  in  complexion  and  fliape,  aHo  that  they  are  equally  timorous 
and  cowardly  is  (7)  undeniable.  But  I  Ihall  pafs  over  thefe,  and 
fome  other  (8)  circumftances,  as,  perhaps,  neither  the  one  nor 
rhe  other  are  fuch  diftinguilhing  marks,  as  not  to  be  met  with 
among  other  Oriental  people. 

The  name  of  Polgar,  carries  more  weight  with  it,  which  we 
find  among  the  Gipfies,  ev-en  in  th£  earlieft  times,  before  they  began 
to  change  tlie  names,  they  brought  with  them,  for  our  European 
ones.  Polgar,  as  we  may  remember,  was  the  name  of  the  leader, 
who  in  the  year  1496,  obtained  a  fafe  condu<5k,  from  the  Hunga- 
rian King,  Uladiflaus  II.  by  virtue  of  which,  he,  with  his  hord, 
confining  of  twenty  five  tents  or  families,  had  the  liberty  of 
travelling  about  where  they  (9)  pleafed.  Now  this  name  Polgar, 
originates  in  India,  where  it  is  the  appellation  of  a  Deity,  prefiding 
over  marriges  and  matrimonial  concerns,  and  the  Indians  are  very 
fond  of  bearing  it,  as  well  as  the  names  of  their  other  Deities, 
which  they  do  very  (10)  frequently. 

As,  further  above,  in  reciting  the  Gipfey  profeffion,  their 
fmith's  bufinefs  was  mentioned  ;  it  was  remarked,  their  anvil  is  a 
ftone,  and  what  mor-e  implements  they  ufe  confift  in  a  pair  of 
hand  bellows,  tongs,  hammer,  vife,  and  a  file.  With  fuch  a 
portable  apparatus,  the  travelling  Gipfey  wanders  from  place  to 
(11)  place.  If  we  compare  this,  with  what  Somerat  rehtcs  of 
the  Indian  fmiths,  the  accounts  agree  fo  exaftly,  that  it  fliould 
feem  as  if  I,  or  rather  the  author  I  copy,  had  tranfcribed  literally 
from  him.  This  will  appear  plainer,  if  I  infert  his  own  words. 
^'  The  fmith,"   he  fays   "  carries  his  tools,  his   (hpp,   and   his 

"  forge 


(     i66     ) 

Chap.  V.  «  forge  about  with  him,  and  works  in  any  place,  where  he  can 
"  find  employment :  he  eredls  his  fliop  before  the  houfe  of  his 
"  employer,  raifmg  a  low  wall  with  beaten  earth,  before  which 
"  he  places  his  hearth,  behind  this  wall  he  fixes  two  leathern 
"  bellows,  which  his  apprentice  blows  alternately,  to  keep  up  the 
"  fire.  He  has  a  ftone  inftead  of  an  anvil,  and  his  whole  appa- 
"  ratus  is  a  pair  of  tongs,  a  hammer,  a  beetle  and  a  file."  (12) 
The  moft  ftriking  circumitance  of  this  is,  that  both,  Gipfey  and 
Indian,  fliould  ufe  the  fame  kind  of  hand  bellows,  and  both  have 
exaftly  two.  As  the  apprentice  works  thefe  for  the  Indian,  fo  does 
the  wife  or  one  of  the  children  for  the  Gipfey.    (13) 

What  is  further  afl"erted  of  the  young  Gipfey  girls,  rambling 
about  with  their  fathers,  who  are  muficians,  dancing  in  all  kinds  of 
indecent  and  lafcivious  attitudes  and  geftures,  to  (14)  divert  any 
perfon  who  is  willing  to  give  them  a  fmall  gratuity  for  it,  is  like- 
wife  quite  Indian.  Sonnerat  confirms  this  alfo.  "  Surat  is,"  he  fays, 
/"  famous  for  its  dancing  girls.  Thefe  young  women  devote 
"  themfelves,  entirely,  to  the  worfhip  of  the  Gods,  whom  they 
"  attend  in  the  proceffions,  dancing  and  fmging  before  the  repre- 
"  fentations  of  them.  The  handycraftfmen  generally  deftine  the 
"  youngeft  of  their  daughters  to  this  fervice,  and  fend  them  to 
*'  the  pagoda  before  they  come  to  the  age  of  puberty.  There 
"  they  have  dancing  and  mulic  mafters,  with  perfons  to  teach 
"  them  to  fing.  The  Bramins  form  their  young  minds,  and 
"  deflour  them ;  in  the  end  they  become  common  proftitutes. 
"  They  then  join  in  companies,  take  muficians  with  them,  to 
"  entertain  any  body,  that  chufes  to  engage  them,  with  mufic  and 
"  (15)  dancing."    Sonnerat  fpeaks  here  alfo,  of  the  wanton  geftures 

of 


(     j67     ) 

of    thefc  dancing    girls,    of  which    he    has    given    a    drawing;     Chap.  V. 
and  ends  his  defcription  thus.      "  The  blinking  of   their  eyes, 
"  half  open,   half  flnit,  and  the  negligent  finking  of  their  bodies, 
"  to  the   nioft  languilhing    mufic,   fliew   that  their   whole  frame 
"  breathes   nothing   (16)   but  lafcivioufnefs." 

Fortunetelling  is  univerfal  all  over  the  eaft ;  but  the  particular 
fpot,  where  that  peculiar  fort,  praftifed  by  the  Gipfies,  viz. 
chiromancy;  conftantly  referring  to  whether  the  party  (liall  be 
rich  or  poor,  fortunate  or  unhappy  in  marriage ;  whether  they 
fliall  have  many  or  few  children,  &c.  is  no  where  but  in  India. 
I  (hall  quote  an  inftance,  from  thence,  in  order  to  evince,  how 
perfedly  Gipfeyifli  it  is.  "  It  once  happened,"  fays  Bald^^us, 
"  that  the  Rajah  Kans  made  his  appearance  before  the  inhabitants; 
"  (17)  when  being  given  to  underftand,  that  an  experienced  Bramin 
"  was  arrived,  he  ordered  him  to  be  brought  before  him,  and 
"  faid;  Narret,  (that  was  his  name)  look  at  my  daughter's 
"  hand,  and  inform  me  whether  (he  will  be  happy  or  unfortunate, 
"  poor  or  rich,  whether  (lie  will  have  many  or  few  children,  if 
"  her  life  will  be  long  or  (hort,  fpeak  out  freely,  and  conceal 
"  nothing."  The  Bramin  having  looked  at  her  hand,  replied, 
"  May  it  pleaie  your  Majefty,  according  to  the  indication  of 
"  thefe  lines,  I  read  thus ;  (lie  (liall  bear  feven  children,  viz.  fix 
"  fons  and  a  daughter,  the  youngeft  of  which,  (hall  not  only 
*'  deprive  you  of  your  crown  and  empire,  but  likewife  of  your 
"  head  and  life,  and  afterwards  place  himfelf  in  your  feat." 
This  method,  Bald^eus  adds,  of  looking  in  the  hands,  is  very 
common  among  the   (18)  Heathens, 

The 


.€' 


C     i6S     ) 

Chap.  V.  The  exceffive  loquacity  of  the  Gipfies,  as  well  as  their  very 
advantageous  natural  qualities,  which  I  have  taken  notice  of  above^ 
are  likewife  diftinguifliing  marks  (19)  of  the  Indian  ;  befides,  the 
very  name  Zigeuner,  or,  according  to  a  broader  way  of  pronun- 
ciation, Ciganen  and  Tchingenen,  is  the  appellation  of  an  Indian 
people,  as  Thevenot's  Zinganen,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Indus, 
(20)  prove. 

Some  few  more  hints,  which  give  a  faint  intimation  of  the 
Indian  defcent  of  the  Gipfies,  are,  that  the  Gipfies  are  fo  fond 
of  (21)  faftron.  Secondly,  as  Twifs  affures  us  of  thofe  in  Spain, 
that  they  never  intermarry  with  any  people  who  are  not,  like 
themfelves,  of  Gipfey  extradlion ;  which  puts  us  ftrongly  in  mind 
of  the  Indian  Cafts. . 

CHAPTER      VI. 

The   Gipfies   are   of  the   Cajl   called  Suders. 

X  COME    now    to    the    main   defign   of    my    treatife,    to    the 

pofition,    that    the   Gipfies    are   of    the    loweft  clafs    of  Indians, 

namely,  Farias,  or  as  they  are  called  in  Hindoflan,  Suders. 

The  whole  great  nation  of  Indians,  is  known  to  be  divided  into 

four  ranks  or  flocks,   which    are   called  by   a  Portuguefe   name, 

Casts,  each  of  which  has  its  own  particular   fubdivifions.     Of 

thefe   Cafts,   the  Bratnin  is    the    firft.     The  fecond   contains   the 

Tfhecbleries    or     Sefreas.       The    third    confifts    of    the    Bcis    or 

IFafders.     The  fourth  is  the  Caft  of,  the  juft  mentioned,  Suders: 

who  upon  the  Peninfula  of  Malabar,  where  their  condition  is  th6 

fatne  as  in  Hindoftan,  are  called  Farias  or  Farier. 

The 


(     i69     ) 

The  relative  (ituation  of  thefe  four  Cafts,  and  the  grounds  of  Chap.  Vl- 
their  diiFerence,  reft  on  the  Indian  fable  of  the  Creation.  This 
relates,  that  the  God  who  created  Bruma,  ordained  that  the 
Bramin  fliould  proceed  out  of  Bruma's  mouth;  the  Tchechterie 
out  of  his  arms;  the  Beis  out  of  his  legs;  and  the  Suder  from 
his  feet.  As  Bruma  afterwards  allotted  the  employments  of  each 
of  thefe  ftocks ;  he  appointed  the  firft  to  feek  after  knowledge, 
to  give  inftrudlion  and  to  take  care  of  religion.  The  fecond  was 
to  ferve  in  war.  The  third  was  alfo  to  cultivate  fciencc,  but  to 
attend,  particularly,  to  the  breeding  of  cattle  and  agriculture. 
The  Caft  of  Suders  was  deftined  to  be  fubfervient  to  the  Bramins, 
the  Tfchechteries  and  the  (i)  Beis.  Thefe  Suders  are  held  in 
the  greateft  contempt;  they  are  infamous  and  unclean,  from  their 
occupations ;  they  are  abhorred  becaufe  they  eat  flefli,  whereas  the 
three  other  Cafts  live  on  vegetables  only. 

Of  this  very  Caft,  as  will  appear  by  the  following  comparifon, 
our   Gipfies   are  compofed. 

Above  we  have  become  acquainted  with  them,  as  in  the  higheft 
degree  filthy,  and  difgufting ;  with  regard  to  charafter,  of  the 
moft  depraved  hearts :  they  were  thievifh,  liars,  and  fraudulent  to 
excefs,  and  thefe  are  exaftly  the  qualities  of  the  Suders.  Baldjeus 
fays,  "  the  Pareas  are  a  filthy  race,  in  a  word,  a  contemptible 
"  ftinking  people:  a  wicked  crew,  who  in  winter  fteal  much 
"  cattle,  kill  them,  and  fell  the  (2)  hides."  It  is  again  related 
in  the  Danifli  MifTion  Intelligence,  "  No  body  can  deny  that 
"  the  Bareier  are  the  dregs  and  refufe  of  all  the  Indians;  they  have 
"  wicked  difpofitions,  are  thievifti,  arrant  liars,  cannot  bear 
■*'  good  ufage,  require  to  be   kept  in  order  by  fear  and  blows, 

7,  "  and 


(     '7°     ) 

Ghap.  V-L  "  and  held  under  contimial  (3)  reftraint."  Moreover  Neuhof 
affures  us,  "  The  Parriias  are  full  of  every  kind  of  difhonefty,. 
"  they  do  not  look  upon  lying  and  cheating  to  be  finfull;  as  they 
"  have  no  other  maxim  or  cuftom  among  (4)  them." 

In  addition  to  the  foregoing,  the  Gipfies  lovC;  to  intoxicate; 
rjiemfelves,  they  are  particularly  fond  of  brandy,  becaufe  it 
more  fpeedily  anfwers  their  purpofe  than  any  other  drink. 
Among  the  Suders  we  find  this  inclination,  without  exception, 
though  other  Indians  do  not  commit  fuch  qxcefs,  or  at  mod 
very  feldom,  and  that  (5)  privately. 

What  has  been  further  faid,  with  refpedt  to  the  immoral  (6) 
life  of  the  Gipfies,  agrees  perfeftly  with  the  Suders.  "  Their 
"  wives  and  daughters,"  fays  Neuhof,  "  make  no  difficulty  of 
'f  yielding  up  their  perfons,  for  money,  to  any  fort  of  people, 
"  be  they  of  what  country  or  religion  foever:  as  the  inclination; 
"of  this  tribe  tends  more  to  voluptuoufnefs,  than  towards 
"  diligence  or  (7)   induftry." 

With  regard  to  Gipfies  marriages,  it  has  been  aflerted,  that  it 
made   no   difference  with  their   confciences,    whether   the    party , 
was  the  neareft  relation  or  an  utter  ftranger,  or  as  Salmon  expreffes.. 
himfelf,  the  neareft  relations  cohabit,  like  bcafts  with  each  other, 
and  as  to  education,    that  their  children  grow  up,    in  the  mofc  • 
fhameful  negleft,    withqut  either  difcipline    or   inftruftion.     All 
this  is  precifely  the  cafe  with  the  Pariars.     In  the  Journals  of- 
the  Miffionaries  already  quoted,  it  is  faid,    "  with  refpeft  to  (8) 
"  matrimony    they   ad  like  the   beafts,    and   their    children    are 
•f  brought  up  without  reftraint  or  information. 

Gipfies . 


(  I/I  ) 

Gipfies  are  fond  of  being  about  horfes ;    the  Suders    in  India     Chap.  Vl 
likewile,     for    which    reafon    they   are    commonly  employed,  as 
horfekeepers,  by  the  Europeans  refident  in  that  (9)  country. 

The  Gipfies  were  formerly  the  common  flayers,  hangmen,  and 
•executioners,  all  over  Hungary  and  Tranfilvania,  and  ftill  readily 
perform  thofe  offices,  whenever  called  upon.  In  like  manner,  in 
India,  no  one,  who  is  not  of  the  Call  of  Suders,  will  on  any 
account  tranfadl  that  kind  of  (10)  bufmcfs.  j 

That  the  Gipfies  hunt  after  cattle  which  have  died  of  diftcm- 
pers,  in  order  to  feed  on  them,  and  where  they  can  provide  more, 
than  is  fufficient  for  one  day's  confumption,  dry  it  in  the  (11) 
fun,  which  is  likewife  a  conftant  cuftom  with  the  Pariars  in  India. 
"  It  is  their  office,"  according  to  the  accounts  we  have  of  them, 
"  to  remove  carrion,  which  they  cut  up,  part  they  boil  frefh 
""  and  eat,  other  parts  they  dry  in  pieces,  by  the  heat  of  the 
"  fun,  for  their  future  (12)  provifion." 

Hitherto  the  accounts  of  the  Gipfies  and  Suders  perfeAly 
•coincide.  Even  the  beforementioned  fmiths  and  dancing  girls, 
are  (13)  of  this  Caft :  and  as  they  before,  from  the  fimilarity  of 
■their  make,  (hewed,  in  general,  their  being  of  Indian  extradiion, 
fo,  in  this  inftance,  they  give  particular  evidence,  that  they 
are  defcendants  from  the  very  loweft  clafs. 

But  there  are  ftill  fome  further  traits,  relating  to  the  Gipfies; 
we  fliall  now  examine,  whether  they  alfo  are  to  be  found  among 
the  Suders.  Of  thefe  the  firft  is,  that  the  Gipfies  always  chufe 
■their  place  of  refidence,  near  fome  village  or  city,  very  feldom 
within  the  village  or  city,  even  though  there  may  be  no  order 
'o    prevent    it;  as   is  the  cafe  in  ]\IoIdavia,  Walkchia,  and    all 

Z  2  parts 


C    17^    ) 

Ghap.  VI.  parts  of  Turkey.  Even  the  more  improved  kind  of  them,  in 
Tranfilvania,  who  have  long  fince  difcontinued  their  wandering 
mode  of  life,  and  might,  with  permiflion  from  government,  inhabit 
within  the  cities,  yet  rather  chufe  to  build  their  huts  in  fome 
bye  place,  without  the  limits  of  it.  This  feems  to  be  the  remains 
of  their  original  Suder  education;  it  being  the  cuftom,  all  over. 
India,  for  the  Suders  to  have  their  huts,  without  the  villages 
of  the  other  Cafts,  and  in  retired  places  nsar  their  (14)  cities. 

Further,  with  regard  to  the  Gipfies  religion,  we  may  eahly 
recolleft,  from  the  above,  that  their  fenfe  of  it  is  very  flight, 
and,  that  they  have  not  the  leaft  degree  of  fteadinefs  in  it.  Every  one 
is  indifferent  to  him ;  as  often  as  he  comes  to  a  new  place, 
where  he  meets  with  a  different  one,  he  changes  his  opinions. 
To  day  he  receives  the  Sacrament  as  a  Lutheran,  next  Sunday 
from  a  Roman  Catholic,  and,  perhaps,  before  the  end  of  the 
week  partakes  of  the  communion  in  a  Reformed  Church.  Yet, 
the  greater  part  of  them,  do  not  even  go  fo  far  as 
this,  but  live  without  any  religion  at  all,  and  are,  as  Toll i us 
fays,  worfe  than  Heathens.  The  more  wonderful  and  unheard 
of  fuch  an  appearance  is,  of  a  whole  people  being  fo 
void  of  and  indifferent  about  religion,  the  more  weight  it 
carries  with  it,  in  my  opinion,  that  all  this  fnould  be  literally 
true  of  the  Suders.  "  This  race,"  fays  Rogerius,  of  the  Suders 
in  the  Kingdom  of  Surat,  "  feems  to  be  neither  Heathens  nor 
Mahometans ;  but  live  on  in  their  own  way,  v/ithout  any 
religion,  or  worfhipping  (15)  of  God.  There  are  fome,  it  is 
true,  who  imitate  the  other  Cafts,  in  an  outward  fhew  of  religion, 
?,nd  make  priefts  for  themfelves ;     but  they  never  frequent  the 

pagodas 


(     '73     ) 

pagodas  of  the  higher  Cafts,  nor  have  any  of  their  (t6)  own  :     Chap.  VI^. 
and  as  to  the  choice  of  their  deities,   every  one  conforms  to  the 
cuftom  of  the  place,    where  he  lives,  or  happens  to  remain   a 
Oiort  time,  exadly  the  fame   (17)  as  the  Gipfies. 

If  one  might  prefume  to  take  for  granted,    what  I  have  only     • 
conditionally  aflerted,    and    quoted  as  an  article  given  up,  viz. 
that  the  Gipfies  are  cannibals :     evidence  would  not  be  wanting 
to  prove,  that   the  Suders  arc  equally  infamous.     This  teftimony 
is  very  ancient,  I  allow,  it   is  to  be  found  in  (18)   Herodotus; 
confequently  is  not  fo  decifive,  as   if  it  were  of  a  more  modern 
date.     But  it  mufl  be  confidered,   at  the  fame  time,  that  Oriental 
manners  change  very  little,    and  his    defcription    of    the   other 
Indian  Cafts   is   punftually  juft;     fo  it  is   not    improbable,    that 
the  barbarous  cuftom    of  eating  human  flefti,    and    particularly, 
as  Herodotus  fays,  of  killing  and  eating  the  neareft  relations  or  .•      "         ' 
friends,    when  they  were  advanced  in  years,  or  were  fick,   might 
ftill    prevail,   among  the  lovveft  Caft  of  Indians,  \\hich  he   calls  : 
Padaans,    and  be  ftill   in  ufe,    when  the  Giphes  emigrated   from 
thence.     At  leaft  we  may  conclude  fo  much  from  this  evidence,  . 
that  eating  human  flefh  had  been  a  cuftom  among  this  people^ 
\MTiether  it  has  at  all,    or  in  what  parts  of  India,    even  in  more 
modern  times,  this  praftice  may   have  continued,  and   perhaps, 
as  among  the  Gipfies,    may  ftill  be  privately  carried    on  ?     Is  a 
queftion,    which    can    only    be    determined,    by  fome  obferving 
European,  who  has  been  long  enough  refident  in  India,  particularly  .• 
in  the  weftern  parts  of  it. 

If  people,  in  reflecting  on  the  emigration  of  the  Gipfies,   are 
not  determined  to  imagine,    that  they  were  aduated  by  a  blind 

impulfe,. 


tChap.  VI.     impuhc,    to  break  up  at  once,    and  quit  their  native  country'; 
there  is  no  caufe  to  be  affigned,  for  their  retreat  from  thence, 

"  by  any  means  fo  plaufible,  as  the  war  of  Timur  Beg  in  India. 
The  date  of  their  arrival  marks  it  very  plainly.     It  was  in  the 

^year  1408  and  1409,  that  this  conqueror  ravaged  India,  and 
liaving  perfuaded  himfelf,  as  well  as  his  followers,  that  he  had 
undertaken  the  expedition   (19)   againft  India,    for  the  purpofe 

'of  fp reading  the  Mahometan  religion ;  his  war  was  quite 
oppreffive  enough  to  occafion  fuch  an  emigration.  For  not  only 
every  one  who  made  any  refiftance  was  deftroyed,  and  fuch  others 
as  fell  into  the  enemies  hands,  though  never  fo  defencelefs, 
were  made  ilaves,  but,  fhortly  after,  thefe  very  flaves,  to  the 
number  of  an  hundred  thoufand,  (20)  were  put  to  death. 
As,  on  this  occafion,    an  univerfal  panick  took   place,    nobody 

'being  fecure,  that  it  might  not  be  his  own  fate  in  a  (liort 
time,  what  could  be  more  natural,  than  that,  a  great  number 
of  terrified  inhabitants  fliovild  endeavour  to  fave  themfeives  by 
flight. 

There  feems  to  be  fome  reafon  to  obje<ft  here,  that  when 
this  fuppofed  flight  took  place,  had  it  been  true,  not  Giplies 
only,  or  the  lowefl  clafs  of  people,  but  with  them  all  forts  of 
Indians,  of  fupcrior  rank,  would  have  come  among  us.  But 
this  argument  will  fall  of  itfelf,  when  we  refleft  on  the  pre- 
pofleflion,    which    the   three    higher  Cafl:s  of  Indians  entertain, 

for  their  country.  They  afcribe  an  extraordinary  degree  of 
holinefs  to    it,    and  believe  it   to  be  the  only   country  thought, 

''by  the  Creator  of  the  Univerfe,  worthy  for  fuch  fanftificd  people, 

.as  the  Bramins,  Tfchechteries,  and  Beis  to  dwell  in.     They  would 

fooner 


(     ^75     ) 

faoner  I'uffer  torture  and    death,   than  quit  this  land  chofen  Ijy     Cl\ap,.  YI. 

the  Ahnighty  himfclf,   for  their  rcfidence,  to  go  and  dwell  any 

where  elfe.     Moreover,  a  Sudcr  is,  in  their  eftimation,  the  moft 

execrable  being  in  the  world,  and   the  lead  intercourie  with  him 

would  be  defiling,  and  degrading  their  high  charafters,  which,  to 

them,   would  be  more  dreadful  than  death.      Wherefore  it  was 

a  moral  impoffibility,  for  thofe  of  an  higher  Caft,  to  have  any 

thing   in  common  with  a  Suder,  or  that  they,  fhould  have  made 

a.  united  retreat.     Finally,  by  putting  thcmfelves  into  the  power 

of  the  Suders,    with  whom    they  live    conftantly  in   a    flate    of 

difcord  (21)  and  inveteracy,  they  would  have  nia  a  greater  riilc/ 

of  their  lives,  than  by  patiently  expefting  their  fate,  from  the. 

hands    of    their   common  enemy.      In   cafe   any  of   the  higher 

ranks  of  Indians    did    withdraw  themfelves,    on   account   of  the 

troubles,    it    is   probable  they   retired  fouthwards,    to  people  of 

their  own  fort,    the  Marattas. 

As  to  the  northward  and  eaftward  every  part  was  befet  by  the 
enemy,    and  no  paflage  left,    in   thofe   direftions,    for  efcaping;, 
moft  probably  the  countries  below  Multan,  to  the  mouth. of  the 
Indus,  were  the  firft  afylum  and  rendezvous  of  the  fugitive  Suders,. 
Here  they  were  fafe,,  and  fo  remained,  till  Timur  returned  from., 
his  viftories  on  the  Ganges.     Then  it  was  that  they  firft  entirely 
quitted  the  country;    and,  probably,    with   them  a    confiderable 
number  of  the  proper  inhabitants  about  the  Indus,    which  wilL 
explain    the    meaning   of    their    original   name,    Ciganen,     or,, 
according  to   the  German  mode  of  fpeaking,   Zigeuner.     For  if. 
it  was  in  the  country  of  the  Zihganen,  where  thefe  terrified  fugitives  . 
colleded,  and  they  drew  a  confiderable  number  of  the  Zinganen. , 

themfelves 


C    176    ) 

Ch^p,  VL  themfelves  along  \vith  them;  nothing  could  be  more  eafy  or 
natural,  than  that  the  people,  who  had  come  together  from  the 
general  wreck,  ftiould  take  the  name  of  the  greater  number,  as 
being  all  of  one  country,  when  the  whole  were  blended  together. 
By  what  track  they  came  to  us,  cannot  be  afcertalned ;  if  they 
went  ftraight  through  the  fouthern  Perfian  defarts  of  Sigiftan, 
Makran  and  Kirman,  along  the  Perfian  Gulph  to  the  mouth  of  the 
Euphrates,  from  thence  they  might  get,  by  Baffora,  into  the  great 
defarts  of  Arabia,  afterwards  into  Arabia  Petriea,  fo  arrive  in 
Egypt,  by  the  Ifthmus  of  Sues.  They  muft  certainly  have 
been  in  Egypt,  before  they  reached  us;  otherwife  it  is  incom- 
prehenfible,  how  the  report  arofe  that  they  were  Egyptians. 
By  what  opportunity  they  were  afterwards  tranfported  to 
Europe  is  alfo  an  obfcure  refearch:  perhaps  it  was  effefted  by 
means  of  theTurks,  who  being  at  that  time  fully  employed, 
Avith  the  Grecian  empire,  might  permit  the  Gipfies  to  travel 
about  with  the  rabble  of  Serdenjefti  and  Nephers,  who  were 
appointed  to  go  on  ravaging  parties. 

If  any  perfon  wiflies  to  affign  fome  other  reafon,  for  their 
wandering,  I  fliall  not  difpute  it,  as  all  that  can  be  faid,  upon 
the  fubjeft,  is  mere  furmife.  My  chief  aim  was  to  prove  them 
to  be  come  from  Hindoftan,  and  that  they  were  Suders,  which 
I  hope  I  have  accompliflied.  At  leaft  I  do  not  fee  how  one  can 
folve  the  riddle,  that  every  thing,  even  the  moft  fortuitous 
concomitant  circumftances,  particularly  that  moft  decilive  one, 
the  fimilarity  of  their  language  to  that  of  Hindoftan,  fhould  fo 
uniformly  point  out  that  extraction,  yet  that  they  fhould  belong 
to  a  different  country,  and  be  defcended  from  another  people. 

FINIS. 


(     '77    ) 


NOTES    to    the    Introduction. 

(i)  JLyET  us  only  confider  the  robberies  of  the  Arabians,  which  were  for- 
merly, and  ftill  continue  to  be  permitted  and  honorable  amoiig  them. 

{2)  In  this  alfo  the  Arabians  will  ferve  as  an  illuftration,  from  whom  it  is 
derived,  to  efteem  any  one  diflionorable  who  fuffers  himielt  to  make  a  certain  noife, 
in  the  prefence  of  other  people.  I  will  produce  the  pafliige,  from  la  Roque. 
'*  Ce  qu'il  y  a  de  plus  malhonuete  parmi  cux,  c'eit  de  lacher  des  ventb,  c'cfl 
"  une  eipcce  dc  crime  que  d'en  fairc  volontaircment. .  Lors  qu'il  Icur  en  echappe 
"  par  malheur  dans  quelque  compagnle,  ils  font  regardes  conime  des  gens  iofames, 
"  avec  qui  I'on  ae  veut  plus  avoir  de  commerce,  &  il  eft  fouvent  arrive  que  ceux 
"  qui  avoient  cvj  ce  malheur,  out  etc  obliges  de  s'abfenter,  &  de  pafler  chez  d'au- 
'^  tres  peuples,  pour  n'etre  pas  expofes  aux  huees,  &  a.  toutes  les  fuites  d'une 
"  mechante  reputation."  Voyage  dans  la  Palejiine,  par  Mr.  lie  la.  Rojue,  Araft.  . 
1718.  p.    141. 

(3)  V.   La   'vie  de   Mahomet,   par  Jean  Gagnier>     T.  i.    p.  105.   190.  393. 

(4)  V.  Ltttris  edijianles. 

(5)  Salmon  gegeniudrtiger  Staat  des  Kaiferthums  China,  Kap.  2.  S.  23.  Of 
the  oyfter  fliells,  he  fays,  they  are  made  fo  thin  and  clean,  that  they  admit  the 
light,  but  are  not  tranfparent  like  glafs, 

(5)  They  (the  Chinefe)  have  hardly  any  jvift  inftruments  for  marking  time ; 
what  they  ufe  ad  cither  by  fire  or  water.  Thofe  that  aft  by  water,  fomething 
refemble  our  large  hour  glaifcs.  Thofe  which  aiTt  by  fire,  are  compofed  of  fwcet 
fmelling  powder,  made  up  into  a  fort  of  match.  Job.  Neuhofs  Gefandfchaft  der 
OJlindifchen  GeJeVjchaft  in  den  ■vereinigten  Niederlanden  an  den  Sinifchen  Kayfer. 
Amft.  1569,  Seit  239.  The  publick  clock  in  China,  as  in  Siam,  conlifts  of  a 
veliel  filled  with  water,  on  the  furface  of  which  is  placed  a  copper  bafon,  having 
a  fmall  hole  bored  in  the  bottom  ;  through  which  the  water  entering,  in  a  certain 
time  f:nks  the  bafon.  As  foou  as  it  fml;  ,  the  perfon  appointed  to  watch  it, 
particularly  at  niglit,  calls  the  hour;  the  bafon  is  then  taken  out,  emptied,  and 
replaced.     Salmon  Staat  'uon  Siam     K;ip  6.  S.  67. 

A  a  .  (7)     Toppeltln  . 


.-<*-■   .• 


M 


<i,'.-) 


47.8  Notes  to  the  Introdu3ion. 

(7)  Toppeltin  fays  exprefsly,  that  the  Gipfies,  hi  Tranfilvania,  are  avoided 
by  every  body,  on  account  of  their  horrid  appearance;  and  that  no  perfon,  in 
that  country,  will  deign  to  have  any  cordial  intercourfe  with  them.  Quura  autera 
turpiflinine  iint  corum  foemins  et  omnis  fexus  natural!  nigreJine  horibilis,  valde 
averfanter  contemnunturque  a  populis  Tranfilvanis  nullo  prorfus  confortio  vel 
famiharitate  dignantibus.     Topp.  Orig.  et  occas.  Iranfelv.  cap.  VI.  p.  56. 

(8)  In  a  mandate  to  the  Regency  of  Tranfilvania  ilRicd  the  1 2""  of  September 
1782. 


SECTION     I, 

NOTES    to    the    First    Chapter. 

( 1 )  Buona'ventura  Vulcanius,  in  libro  de  Uteris  et  lingua  Getarum  :  Itali  Cingaros 
vocant,  Galli  Bohemos  quod  indidem  ex  Boheml.1  prima  illorum  eflet  notitia. 
See  Bayle,   alfo,  article  Bohemiens. 

(2)  A  Danifli  law  fays :  The  Tartars  who  ftrole  .ibout,  and  do  much  damage 
d-'                                             to  the  people,  by   their  lies,  thefts,  and   black  art,  fliall  be  taken  into  cuftody  by 

every  magiftrate;  Vide  Leg.  Dan.  Libr.  III.  Cap.  20.  Art.  3.  Schnvedifche 
Bibliothck,  Stockholm  und  Leipzig,  1729.  3'"  St.  Seit  265.  f.  Kranz  Sdchfifcbe 
Chromk,  2'"  Buch.  Kap.  2.  ' 

(3)  Not  Rafelcherami,  according  to  Carl.  Steph.  in  Diaionario  hiflorico 
Geograph.  poetico  edit.  Genev.  1662.  who  quotes  Tbevei  :  Ras,  or  Res— > 
Elcherami,  is,  among  the  Arabians,  the  name  of  a  leader  of  the  Gipfies. 

(4)  Jazeigen  aus  fammtlich.  Kaiferl.  Kinigl.  Erblaiidern,  tiinftcr  Jahrgang, 
Wien  1775,  Seite  176. 

(5)  Snuinburne'i  tra'veh  through  Spain.     London  1779.  p.  229. 

(6)  Vngri/ches  Magaain,    2'"  Band,  erftes  St.  S.  85. 

(7)  Georgi's  Be/cbreibung  alter  Volcker  des   Rufzijchm  Reichs,    S.  146. 

(8)  Anxeigen  aus    den  Kaiferl.  Kinigl.   Erbldnaern,   5'"  Jahrg.    S.  i8i. 

(9)  Hijioire  de  la  Moldanjie  i^  de  la  Falachie,  ]i^y,  l-jyj.  p,    I  70. 

(10)  PeiiJJonnet  ob/ernjations  hijioriques  et  geographiques  Jur  les  petiples  harbares 
^ui  ot2t  habite  les  bords  du  Danube.  Paris  176!;,  p.  109.  d'ou  ell;  vcnu  —  le  nom 
-,du  Tchingenes  que   leur    (the   Gipfies)  donnent  encore   les   Turcs,  et  les  autres 

nutlufls 


Notfs  to  the  F'lrji  Chapter,  1791 

nations  de  TOrient.     Sieh  auch  Salmon  gegenivartigir  Staat  da  Tsirki/ihen  Reicbn 
Tb-.  I.  S.  319. 

(11)  Alartin  Kelfiusin  natalibus  Saxonum  TranJiI'vania,  Cap.  II.  §  14,  Nor. 
c.  Ego  occafione  loci  Procopii  dc  Bell:  Vandalico  Lib.  IV.  p.  355.  ubi  Maurufiot 
quidam  putant  effe  Zingaros,  obfervo,  ipfos  vernacula  ie  appellare  Morre:  audltur 
aliam  inter  blatterones  Amor:,  unde  erudite  cuidam  Amorrita  vifi. 

(12)  Sulzer   Ge/chichte  des  Tranfalpinifchen   Dacient,     2'"  Band.  Seit  137. 

(13)  Vagatur  hinc  inde  genus  quoddam  impoftorum  ^  quos  recentis  Green 
Athinganos,  nos  Zigeunos  nominamus.     Peucer  de  divioat.  p.  160.  edit.  Witt.  1580V 


NOTES    to    the    Second    Chapter. 

(1)  Salmon  gegenimdrtiger    Staat  dcs  lurkifchtn  Reichs.     Erfter  Th.  8.319. 

(2)  Leo  A/ricanu!  m  his  Hiftoire  naturdU  des  Indes,  IJles  tif  terre  ferme  de- 
la  grande  Mer  oceane,  p.  327.  Says  of  the  Rlerchants  of  Agades,  that  they  kept 
great  numbers  of  armed  ilaves  for  their  fecurity ;  and  mentions  that  their  caravans : 
font  tous  vexez  de  divers  peuples  du  defert,  comme  de  ceux  qu'oa  appelle  com- 
munement  Somiens  ou  Egyptlens. 

(3)  Salmon  gegenixsdrtiger  Staat  des  lurhifcheu  Rekhs.  Erfter  Theil.  Seib 
330.  In  the  iz"'  year  o£  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.  The  following  aifl  was. . 
paffed.* 

AN    ACT    concerning     outlandifli     people,     calling     themfclves     Egyptians. 

22  Hen.  VIII.  c.  10. 
Enforced  by  i.  and  2.  Ph.  &  M.  c.  4.  4.  and  5.  Eliz.  c.  20. 
"  FoRASM*j-eH  as  before  this  time  divers  and  many  outlandifti  people  calling 
"  themfelves  Egv'ptians,  ufmg  no  craft  nor  feat  of  Merchandize,  have  come  intj 
"  this  Realm,  and  gone  from  Shire  to  Shire,  and  Place  to  Place  in  great  Company, 
"  and  ufed  great,  fubtil,  and  crafty  means  to  deceive  the  People,  bearing  them 
"  in  hand,    that  they   by  Palmellry  could  tell   Mens  and  Womens  Fortunes,  and 

A  a  1  "  fo 

•  As   the  words    quoted  from  Salmon  differ  from  the  aS  it/el/,   the  Tranjlator    has 
judged  it  expedient  to  in/ert  the  entire  ail  infiead  of  the  quotation. 


i8o  Notes  to  the  Second  Chapter. 

"  fo  many  Times  by  Craft  and  SubtlUy  have  deceived  the  People  of  their  Money, 
♦'  and  alfo  have  committed  many  heinous  Felonies  and  Robberies,  to  the  great 
"  Hurt  and  Deceit  of  the  People  that  have  come  among. 

2.  "  Be  it  therefore  by  the  King  our  Sovereign  Lord,  the  Lords  Spiritual 
"  and  Temporal,  and  the  Commons,  in  this  prefent  Parliament  aflembled,  and  by 
"  the  authority  of  the  fame  ordained,  eftabliflwd,  and  enafted,  that  from  hence 
"  forth  no  fuch  perfon  be  futfered  to  come  within  this  the  King's  Realm ;  and 
"  if  they  do,  then  they  and  every  of  them  fo  doing,  fliall  forfeit  to  the  King 
"  our  Sovereign  Lord  all  their  Goods  and  Chatties,  and  then  to  be  commanded 
"  to  avoid   the   Realm  within   Fifteen  Days  next  after  the   commandment,  upon 

"  pain  of  imprifonment ;  and  it  fliall  be  lawful  to  every  Sheriff,  Juftice  of  Peace, 
"  and  Efcheator  to  Seize  to  the  ufe  of  our  Sovereign  Lord,  his  Heirs  and 
"  Succeflors,    all  fuch  Goods   as    they    or  any  of  them  fliall  have,  and  thereof 

"  *'  to  make  account  to  our  faid  Sovereign  Lord  in  his  Exchequer ;  and  if  it  fliall 
"  happen  any  fuch  Stranger  to  commit  within  this  Realm  any  Robbery  or  any 
"  other  Felony,  and  thereof  be  indifted,  and  arranged  and  to  plead  not  Guilty, 
"  or  any  other  Plea  Triable  by  the  Countiy,  that  then  the  Inqueft  that  fliall 
"  pafs  between  the  King  and  any  fuch  perfon,  fliall  be  altogether  of  Engliflimen, 
"  Albeit  that  the  Party  fo  indided  pray  Medietatem  linguae,  according  to  the 
"  Statute  of  Aim'o  8  Henrlcl  6  or  any  other  Statute  thereof  made. 

3.  "  Provided  Alway  that  the  Egyptians  now  being  in  this  Realm, 
"  have  Monition  to  depart  within  Sixteen  Days  after  Proclamation  of  this  Statute 
"  among  them  fliall  be  made  upon  Pain  of  Imprifonment,  and  Forfeiture  of 
"  their  Goods  and  Chatties ;  and  if  they  then  fo  depart,  that  then  they  fliall 
*'  not  forfeit  their  Goods  nor  any  part  thereof,  this  prefent  Statute  notwithflanding. 

4.  "  Provided  Alway  That  every  fuch  Perfon  or  Perfons,  which  can 
*'  prove  by  two  Credible  perfons,  before  the  fame  party  that  Seizeth  fuch 
"  Money,  Goods,  or  Chatties,  of  the  fame  Egyptians  that  any  part  of  the  fame 
"  Goods,  Money,  or  Chatties,  were  craftily  or  Felonloufly  taken  or  Stolen 
"  from  him,  fliall  be  incontinent  reftored  unto  the  fame  Goods,  Money,  or 
"  Chatties,  whereof  he  maketh  fuch  Proof  before  the  fame  party,  that  fo  Seizeth 
'"  the  fame  Money,  Goods,  or  Chatties,  upon  pain  to  -forfeit  to  the  fame  party 
"*  that  maketh  fuch  proof,  the  double  value  of  the  fame  adion  of  Debt,  Bill, 

"  or 


Notes  to  the  Second  Chapter.  i8i 

"  orothciwlfc  in  nny  of  the  King's  Courts  to  be  fued,  ujxin  fuch  Action  and 
"  Suit  he  fliall  not  be  admitted  to  wage  his  Law,  nor  any  Protection  or  Eflbin 
"  to  be   allowed;     any  Thing   in  this  Ad  to   the  contrary  notwithftanding. 

5.  "  Provided  Always  and  be  it  further  cnaftcd,  That  if  any  Juftice 
■"  of  Peace,  Sheriff,  or  Efcheator,  which  by  authority  of  this  Act,  have  power 
"  to  take  or  Seize  any  Goods  or  Chatties  ef  any  Egyptians,  at  any  time  here- 
"  , after  do  Seize  or  take  the  Goods  or  Chatties  of  any  fuch  Egyptians,  that  then 
♦'  every  fuch  Juftice,  Sheriff,  or  Efcheator,  doing  the  fame,  fliall  havcj  keep^ 
*'  and  retain  "to  his  own  ufe,  the  Moiety  of  all  fuch  Goods  fo  by  him  f'eized; 
"  and  of  the  other  Moiety  fo  by  him  taken  of  Seized;  fliall  make  anfwer  and 
"  account  to  the  King  in  his  Exchequer,  according  to  the  Tenoiif  of  this  prefent 
"  Aft;  any  thing  in  the  fame  A<ft  contained  to  the  contrary  hereof  notwith- 
"  ftanding:  And  that  upon  any  Account  hereafter  to  be  made  for  the  faid 
"  other  Moiety  of  the  fane  Goods,  the  Accountant  fliall  pay  no  manner  of 
"  Fees  or  other  Charges,  for  his  Account  or  Dlfcharge  to  be  had  in  tlie  King's 
"  Exchequer  nor  elfewhere. 

(4)  In  the  year  1 563,  the  fame, 

(5)  Notwithftanding  thefe  laws  produced  the  good  effeft  of  purgiflg  the 
country  from  all  foreign  Oipfies,  it  is  evident  that  a  confiderable  number  of  their 
brood  remain  to  this  time.     fi'a/w»»  as  above,  p.  321. 

(6)  Philip  Thickni'Jfet  Travels  through  France  and  part  ef  Catalonia,  p.  162. 

(7)  The  prefent  King  had  thoughts  of  banifliing  the  whole  race  out  of  his 
dominions — ^Their  abode  in  the  country,  or  their  expulfion,  feems  a  matter  of  little 
confcqucnce,  for  the  lofs  would  not  be  feverely  felt,  except  ia  the  apparent 
diminution  of  population.     Sitiinb,   trwvels  through  Spain,  p.  231. 

(8)  Jc  nc  veux  pas  oublier  de  parler  ici  des  Bohemiens,  dont  il  y  a  un  grand 
nombre  en  Efpagne,  fur  tout  en  Murcie,  aux  environs  de  Cordove,  dc  Cadix  et 
de  Ronda  ;  on  en  trouve  en  plufieurs  pays  de  I'Europe— ifar  nombre,  a  ce  qu'oa 
dit,  Ttmnte  en  Efpagne  n  paffe  40000  tetes.  Voyage  en  Portugal  IS  en  Efpagne  par 
RicharJ TiuifSf  Traduit  de  I'Anglois,  Chap.  27.  p.  204. 

(9)  Thefe  pieces  of  information  were  related  by  a  perfon  who  had  long  rcfided 
la  Italy. 

(10)  V.  Ludv.\  -v.   Hclherg,  JiiJIfche  Gefhichle,  i^"' Bucb.     Seit  695. 


t-8a  Notes  to  the  Second  Chapter^ 

(ii)     Schivedi/che  Biblicth.  Scit.   265,   266. 

(12)  My  uuthority  for  this  Is  the  words  of  a  le.irued  perfon  of  Holfte'in. 
refident  at  Gottingen:  Catharine  the  fecond,  preijious  to  her  quilting  Holjiein,  took 
away  all  the  Ciffics,  ivhicb  lay  about  in  the  forejis  there,  in  troops;  and  endeaiiTred 
tt  fettle  them  in  /ome   province  of  her   dominions,   but  I  do  not  knoiu  ivhere. 

(13)  Vergl.  Jacobi  Tollii  epiJlol<e  itineraria.  Epift.  V.  p.  201,  und  Brejlauer 
Sammiungen,  33fter  Verfijch.  Artik.  7.  S.  69.  The  Gipfies  — .  are  to  be  found 
near  almoft  all  the  Cities  and  Villages  in  Hungary. 

(14)  He  refers  to  a  Regifter,  \vhich  he  faw  at  the  office  In  Temefwar. 
Verfuch  einer  politifhen  und  ?iatiirliche>i  Gefchichte  des  Temef'warer  Banats,  Erfter 
Th.  6'"  Brief.  Seit  196. 

{15)  Zingari -»- quando  in  Tfanffilvaniam-  advolarint,  in  obfcuro  eft;  nulli 
v€ro  ignotum,  eos  aranearum  inftar  Tranffilvaniam  perreptare.  jfofeph  Benk'o 
franjfil'vania,  T.  I.  §  167.  p.  501,  cfr.  Kelpius  in  natalib.  SaxonumTranJJil'jj. 
Gap.  II.    §    14. 

(16)  Befchreibung  der  Moldau,  2'"  Theil,  Bey  B'ufching  Magazin,  Tom.  IV. 
8,85. 

(17)  Sulzer  Gefchichte  des  Tranfalfinifchtn  Daciens,  2'"  Baud,  Seit  136.  146. 
and  Carra  Hifloire  de  la  Moldavie  et  de  la  Valachie  p.  186.  fpeaking  of  the  Gipfies 
in  Moldavia  and  Wallachia,  fays  :  Plufieurs  de  ces  malheureux  habitent  les  forets. 
Peyffonntl  alfo,  p.  1 1 1 .  On  en  trouve  une  prodigieufe  nuiltitude  dans  —  la 
Walachie  et  la  Moldavie. 

(18)  Peyffonnel,  am  angef.  O.  Lcs  Athingans  ou  Tchingenes  font  en  tres- 
grand  uombre  aujourd'hui  dans  tout  I'Emplre  Ottoman ;  mais  ils  font  principale- 
ment  repandus  dans  la  Romolle  ou  Turquie  en  Europe;  orr  en  trouve  une- 
prodigieufc  multitude  dans  toute  la  Thrace  et  la  Bulgarie,  dans  la  Walachie  et 
la  Moldavie,  la  Beffarabie,  et  tous  les  Etats  du  Khan  des  Tartares.  Vergl. 
Neuerofnete  Oltomanifche  T forte,  erfter  Th.  S.  IJ3,  Salmon  gegennvdrliger 
Staat  des    Tiirkifchen  Reichs,   erftsr  Th.  &.32I. 

(19)  T'urkifcher  Schauplatz.,   Num.    106. 

(20)  Peyffonnel.  am  a.  O.    S.  no.  in. 

(21)  Salmon,  am  -.x.  O.  • 


NOTE  S 


(     i83     ) 
NOTES    to    the    Third    Chai-ter. 

(i)      Muajler    in    felner   Cofmogrdphie,      S.     310.        Kranz     Sad'fifihe    Chronih, 
tranflatcd  by  Fabcr  Soninus,  beym  lahr  1417. 

(2)  Anxeigen  aus  din  K.  K.  Erbldndern,  5'"  Jahrg.     S  349  ff. 

(3)  Thomajiusm  diflbrt.  de  Cingaris,  §  36.  fcems  to  believe  that  the  complexion 
of  the  latter  Gipfics  was  not  cxaftly  the  fame  as  theirs  who  firft  arrived.     But 

-all  the  later  writers  contradift  this  notion,  even  if  we  had  not  the  Opportunity  of 
feeing  with  our  own  eyes,  and  to  compare  with  the  old  paintings.  The  excoSi 
foil  of  Angclus  Rocha  (Biblioth.  vaticana  p.  264.)  will  always  apply,  and 
Negroes  may  perhaps  not  be  the  fame  as  Kranzs  horrid,  black  people. 

.(4)  The  breafts  of  the  Hottentot  women  are  fo  large,  that  they  hang  down 
below  the  navel.  They  carry  their  fucking  children  in  a  leathern  fack  at  their 
backs,  the  head  leaning  forwards,  refting  on  the  mothers  fliouldcr.  When  the 
child  wants  to  be  fed,  they  do  not  take  it  out  of  the  fack  to  lay  comfortably  at  the 
breaft,  but  throw  the  breaft  over  the  flioulder  to  them.  S.  Fogels  zehenja&rige 
Oflindifchen  Rei/ebefchreibung,  Seit  74,  and  Pctr.  Kolben  s  Rei/e  4tn  das  yorgetiirge 
der  guten  Hofnung,    z"'  Th.  462. 

(5)  Concerning  the  properties  hitherto  quoted,  confult  Gri/elini,  p.  199. 
jinzeigen  aus  den  K.  K.  Erblandern,  5'"  Jahrg.  S.  350:  And  S-winburne,  p.  230. 
hcs  the  following  words  "  Their  men  are  tall,  well  built,  and  fwarthy,  with 
a  bad  fcowling  eye,  and  a  kind  of  favorite  lock  of  hair  left  to  grow  down 
before  their  ears,  which  rather  increafes  the  gloominefs  of  their  features :  their 
women  arc  nimble  and  fupplc  jointed;  when  young  they  are  generally  hand- 
for.ne,  with  very  fine  black  cye>5;  when  old,  they  become  the  worft  favored 
hags  in  nature. 

(6)  Anzeigen  aus  den  K.  K.  Erbl.  am  a.  O.  und  Winn  Gedanken  mom 
Stadt  und  Landbetteln,  S.  32.  They  (the  Gipfies)  run  fo  fait,  th.it  it  is 
very  difficult  to  overtake  them. 

(7)  Anzeigen  aus   den   K.  K.   Erb/HnJern.  S.  351. 

(8)  Thomas,  differt.  de  Ciiigaris  §  63.  Jnzeigen,  Seit  238.  Jo.  Ge. 
■Eccardi  diff.  de  u/u  et  pra-Jiantia  Jiudii  eiymologici  in  hi/loria.  Helmft.  1707. 
"Num.  I. 

(9)  Ebeft 


184  Nous  to  the  Third  Chapter. 

(9)  Bben  das,  S,  351.  Glpfies  are  therefore  by  no  means  a  proof  of  thfr 
opinion  that  a  black  muft  remain  many  centuries  in  the  country  of  white  people 
l)efore  he  becomes  white,  as  Huartet  believes.     Scrutin  iugenior,  p.  499, 


NOTES   to   the   Fourth   Chapter.. 

(i)     Jtizetgen   aus  den  K.  K.   E>-hl.   5"' Jahrg.  Seit.   286.  f. 

(2)  Breflauer  Samnil.  won  Natur  und  Mtdicln  Gejcl?tchten,  Sonimerquartal, 
J725.  They  (the  Gipfies  in  Hungary)  eat  the  carcafes  of  horfes,  cow:s,  flicep 
he.  which  have  been  thrown  out  upon  the  dunghlll- 

(3)  Jnzeigen,   am  a.  O. 

(4)  Brijlauer  Samml.   am  a.  O.     Und  Anzeigen,  Seit.  328., 

(5)  Anzeigen,  S.   286. 

(6)  They  g«t  fick  and  dead  cattle  from  the  inhabitants,  the  flfefh  of  which 
they  dry  in  the  fun  or  fmoak  in  their  huts,  then  confume  it  ahnoft  raw,  and 
without  dreffing,  as  a  great  delicacy.  Sammlung  iiqn  Natur  uttd  Median  Gejch. 
am  ang.  O. 

(7)  I  was  in  hopes  to  have  procured  a  circumftantial  cxtraft  from  the  ASis 
'which  nxiere  prepared  on  this  occajioii,  but  being  difappointed  in  my  expeftations, 
1  can  only  refer  to  the  publick  prints,  and  fhall  tranfcribe  their  intelligence 
entire,  as  many  of  my  readers  may   not   have  an.  opportunity  of  procuring  them. 

Beytrage  zum  Reichs  Pojfreuler,  St.  71.  1782,  On  the  21ft.  of  Auguft 
there  was  a  dreadful  execution  at  Frauenmark  in  the  Hortenfer  Country. 
Thirteen  delinquents,  Gipfies,  who  had  exifted  twelve  years  by  robbing  on 
the  highway,  and  were  acquftomed  to  eat  the  bodies  of  thofe  they  had  mur- 
dered, were  brought  to  punifliment.  Four  of  them  were  women,  who  were 
beheaded ;  of  the  remaining  nine  men,  fix  where  hanged,  two  were  broken 
nn  the  wheel,  and  the  leader  of  this  inhuman  gang  was  quartered  alive. 
It  is  faid  that  one  hundred  and  fifteen  more,  of  thcfe  European  cannibals,  re- 
iiis.in  ill  the  county  goals. 

(8) 


Noies  to  the  Fourth  Chapter.  iSj; 

(8)  Ilambuv!;.  Nine  ZcUung,  i:,i.  St.  1782.  Hungary,  4.th  of  September. 
The  following'  is  to  be  added  concerning  the  murderers  and  mancatcrs. 
Forty  of  thcfe  mifcreants  have  already  undergone  their  deferved  punifluncnt, 
in  three  fcparate  places.  Some,  as  lately  communicated,  were  broken  upon 
the  wheel  from  below  upwiuds,  two  of  the  moll  atrocious  were  quartered 
nlivc  ;  and  the  remainder,  one  hundred  and  fifteen  in  number,  will  Ihortly 
be  proceeded  againft  in  the  fame  manner.  This  band  has  exlfted  twenty-one 
years,  and  in  the  courlc  of  that  time  facrificed  eighty  tour  people  to  their  cruelty. 
Every  feeling  man  muft  be  ftruck  with  horror  at  the  infernal  rage  of  thefr 
European  Ciinnlbals,  on  hearing  their  confelTion,  that  once  at  a  wedding,  thc\- 
killed  three  people  which  they  eat  with  their  guells,  in  the  greateft  feftivity 
and  joy.  They  prefer  the  flefli  of  a  young  perfon  from  fxxteen  to  eighteen  years 
old.  They  burnt  the  bones,  which,  according  to  their  account,  make  excellent 
coals.  A  Life  guard  man  of  the  coimtry  imdertook  and  fucceeded  in  taking 
their  Harumpafcha  or  Leader.  This  cannibal  hero  was  magnificently  drefled, 
and   wore  ornaments  in  his  cap  to  rhe   value  of  fix  thoufand  guilders. 

Hamburg,  Unpartheiifcl}.  Correfponiknt,  Nr.  159,  1782.  Hungary,  22d 
September.  Befides  thofe  Gipfey  cannibals  which  were  executed  on  the  2 2d 
of  Auguft,  at  P'raumark,  there  were  fifteen  of  thefe  barbarians  put  to  deatli  on. 
the  twenty  fourth  at  Kameza ;  and  on  the  twenty  fixth,  thirteen  more  at  Efabrag. 
In  the  former  place  were  tcven  women  beheaded,  five  men  hanged,  t^vo 
broken  alive  on  the  wheel,  and  one  quartered  alive.  At  the  latter  place 
feven  women  were  beheaded,  four  men  hanged,  and  two  broken  on  the  wheel. 
Many  (Kll  remain  in  confinement,  among  which  is  one,  who  a6led  as  prieft, 
and  married  people  for  two  grofchens  a  time.  Their  Harumpafcha,  who,  as 
we  lately  advifed,  was  taken  by  a  very  fimple  ftratagcm,  carmot  yet  be  brought 
to  any  confeffion  of  his  crimes. 

Franlfurter  Staats  Rijlretto,  Nr.  1J7,  17S2.  Donau  ftrohm,  29  September. 
We  mention  with  horror,  that  befides  thole  inhuman  wretches,  which  have 
already  been  put  to  the  fword,  in  Hungary,  there  arc  one  hundred  and  fifty 
llill  in  chains,  and  fome  thoufands  more  are,  with  good  foundation,  fufpecSled. 
They  are '  all  Gipfies.  Maria  Therefa  had  given  orders,  that  all  thefe  human 
-vermin,  lliould  be  driven   from    their  holes,    and  compelled   to   live  in  villages: 

Bb  but 


186  Notes  to  the  Fourth  Chapter, 

but  that  wife  regulation  was  not  enforced,  and  the  evil  is  now  grown-  to  fuch  a, 
height  as  fcarce  to  be  remedied  without  a  total  extirpation  of  them.  Beiides 
thofe  cannibals,   &c.  then  follows  what  was   recited  in  the  foregoing  article. 

Franlifurter  Staats  Rijlrctto,  Nr.  207,  178^.  Donau  Strohm,  24  December. 
Not  long  ago  it  was  publiflied,  that  forty  five  of  the  meneaters  had  been  exe- 
cuted in  Hungary.  One  hundred  and  fifty  ftill  remain  in  prifon,  whole 
fentence  has,  by  cxprefs  orders  from  court  been  refpited.  Her  Mujefty  not 
thinking  it  poffible  that  the  people,  in  confinement,  could  have  been  guilty  of 
fuch  enormous  crimes;  fent  a  comniiflary  thither  from  court,  to  examine 
minutely  into  the  aftair.  On  his  return  it  was  confirmed  that  they  were  really: 
meneaters ;  and  that  there  are  actually  among  them  fons  who  have  killed  and 
eaten  their  own  fathers. 

(8)     See  the  former  note. 
yj  (9)     Thomas,     diifert.     de  Citigaris,     §     62.     Salmon   gcgemivdrtiger  Staat    des 

TiirhfcljCH  Reicbs,    ifter  Th.  S.  321. 

(10)  Anzcigen    aits  den  K.   K.  EM.    5'"  Jahrg.  Seit  304. 

(11)  V.  Wagenfeil,  Pera  libror.  jwvenilium,  Locul.  II.  Syiiopf.  Geogr.. 
p.    135.   feqq. 

(12)  Salmon,   am  a.  O. 

(13)  Grifelini,  Ver/uch  einer  foliti/chen  und  naturlichen  Gefch.  des  Teme/iv. 
Banats,  Erft.  Th.  Seit  201. 

(14)  S//lzfr  Gr/c/jictjle  des   Tranfalpinifelien  Daciens,   2ter  Th.  S.    14O. 

(15)  AnMtgcn   ans  den  K.  K.  Erbl.   ^ter   Jahrg.  S.  287. 

(16)  Ehen  das,  S.  303. 

(17)  Anzeigea  aus   den   K.    K.    ErhUindcrn,    am   angef.  O.  S.  288. 

(18)  Wherefore  Mart.  Kelpe  aU'erts  (  Natales  Saxon.  Tratijilvan.  Cap. 
n.   §  14.  not.  c.)    Quicquid  lucrantur   Cauponas  &  amiftui  impendunt,   &c. 

(19)  Brandy  is  a  neceflary  thing  at  their  chriilenings,  weddings,  and  all 
merry  ntakings.  They  reckon  thofe  days,  when  they  have  been  tumbling 
about  in  a  ftate  of  drunkennefs,  having  loft  all  power  of  recoUeflion,  the  beft, 
jnoft  fortunate,  and   happicft  times  of  their  lives.      Anzeigen,  am  a.  O. 

(20)  Anzcrgen,  am   angef.  O.     S.   287. 

"■■■  ^i«— aBasffiMa^y w'  wi.. 

NOTES 


(     i87     ) 
NOTES     to     the     Fifth     Chapter. 

(i)     Stumpf,   Schweitzer  Chronik,  Blatt  425.     They  poflcircd   much  gold  and 
Silver,  but  were  very  ill  cloathcd. 

(2)  Kranz.  in  Saxofiia,  Buch  2.  K;ip.  2.  Bl.  239.      Their  Piinccs,  the  Counts 
and  Noblemen  among  them,  are  well  drcfled. 

(3)  Anzeigen,   am  angef.  O.  S.  310.  imd  njon   Windifch   Geographic  des  K'a- 
nigreichs  Ungarn.    iftcr  Th.  S.   49. 

(4)  Hijloirc   de  la  Moldavic,    fe*  de   la    Falachie,  p.    186. 

(5)  ^«z.  S.  310.  313. 

(6)  Am  angef.  Ort.  S.  311.  312. 

(7)  Mart.  Kelpius,  in  'Natalibus  Saxonum  7'ranjllvan,  C.  II,  §  14.  not.  c. 
Quicqviid  lucrantur,  Caupona  St  amiifui  impendunt,  qui  Ita  fibi  cohaeret, 
us  pilcus  puniceus,  veftis  item  ex  holoferico  vel  panno  rubro  fatis  habeatur 
ornament!,  etiamli  caligarum  &  calceorum  rimae  &  affutorae,  vcl  Hcraclito 
rifum  moveant. 

(8)  Jofeph  Benkh\  Trayiffll-vatiia,  Tom.  I.  §  167.  nat.  2.  p.  105.  Veftes 
geftant  potilTimum  Hungaricas  —  vix  tamen  fub  fole  eft  natio  hac  fuperbior, 
Magnatum  et  Nobilium  amiftu,    poftquam  illis  ufus  ejus  exolevit,    deleftontur. 

(9)  Jlnzeigcn,    am  angef.  O.   S.  309.  f. 

(10)  V.  1).  Windifch  Geographic  da  Konignichs  Ungarn,  Th.  i.  S.  49. 
•und  Anzeigen,  S.  310. 

(11)  Benin,  TranJUil'van.  T.  I.  pag.   504. 

(12)  Angelus  Rocha  in  Bibliotheca  Vaticana,  p.  364.  Veftibus  immundi  & 
ufu  rerum  fsedi  prsfenim  fxminse.  And  Kranz  fays  the  fame  thing  in  Saxonia, 
2te3  Buch,  Kap.  2. 

(13)  V.  T,  Windifch,  am   angef.  O.     Benkli,    1.  c. 

(14)  Anzeigen,  am  a.  O. 

(15)  As  above,  .  .  .  About  forty  years  ago.  Ladies,  of  the  firft  quality 
in  Pcterfljurg,  ufed  to  be  guilty  of  fomewhat  the  fame  kind  of  irregularity. 
They  had  begun  to  adopt  the  French  modes  in  drefs  inftead  of  their  own ;  but, 
as   Salmon  fa)s,    did    not    well    know  how    to    manage  them.       Wherefore,    he 

B  b  2  continues. 


l88  Notes   to  the  Fifth  Chapter. 

continues,  one  nuift  not  be  furprifcd,  notwithftanding  all  the  llatc  of  a  Pc- 
terfburg  Lady,  to  meet  one  of  them,  m  fummer,  at  which  fea:fon  they  ide 
the  Englifli  ftraw  hats,  magnificently  dreiled  in  damafk,  ornamented  with 
gold,  filver,  lace,  and  ribbons,  walking  barefooted,  carrying  her  flippers  iii 
her  hand.     Staat   alter  Natioticn  in  Europa.     Altona  und  Leipz.   1752.  S.  43., 

(16)  Swiiiiurne's  Tra've/s  tiro'  Spain,  pa.  231.  Their  ears  and  necks  are 
loaded  with  trinkets  and  baubles,  and  moft  of  them  wear  a  large  patch  on 
each  temple. 

(17)  This  circumftance  was  related  to  me  by  a  perfon  from  Tranfilvania,  who 
had  been  an  eye  witnefs  of  it. 


NOTES     to     the     Sixth     Chapter. 

( 1 )  Philip  nicliiicjfi:'' i  Rcij'cii  Jure/}  Frankr,  und  eiiioi  Tlxil  "Von  CatalonicKy 
S.   i6;.  der   teutfch.    Ueberf. 

(2)  This  particularly  applies  to  thofe  Gipfies  which  in  Tranfilvania  arc 
called  ]\Ioldavian.  Anzeigeit  aus  den  K.  K.  Erbl.  i;ter  Jahrg.  S.  294.  —  Per- 
haps they  warm  themfelves  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  Calmucks  do,  who 
live  contlantly  under  their  Kibitken  (Tents).  Thefe  have  the  appearance  of 
large  waggoners  frocks,  with  an  aperture  in  the  middle,  ferving  for  a  chimney, 
which  is  flopped,  as  foon  as  the  fire  is  burnt  out,  in  order  to  keep  in  the  heat. 
Sieh  Salmon  gegiwuiartiger  Staat  alter  Kationen  in  Europa.  Aus  dem  Englifchca 
iiberf.  von  Elias  Cafpar  Rcictiard.     Altoua  und  Lpz.   1752.      4  Seite  516. 

(3)  A/meigcn,  am  a.  O. 

(4)  Eie.'i  das.     Benkd,   Tranjfii'v.  p.  505. 

(5)  Salmon's  Hijlor.  oder,  der  gege?nviirtige  Staat  des  Tiirkifehen  ReicL:, 
Th.  I.  S.  322.  That  vyas  alfo  the  euftora  among  them  when  they  firft 
arrived  in  Europe.  Kranz,  in  Sa.\o>iia,  2  Buch,  Kap.  2.  fays.  They  often 
barter  away  their  liorfes,  as  the  generality  of  them  travel  on  foot.  They 
carry  their  women,  bed,  apparatus,  and  fmall  children  on  horfes  or  fomi 
kind  of  beads. 

(,6)     Salmon,  am  angef.  O.      Anzcigen,    S,  295. 

(7)   Crifelinii, 


No/es  to  the  Sixth  Chapter.         \  189 

(7>     Grifelinl,     Gefihichle    des     Temc/wanr    Ba.tals,    Th,     I.    SciW  J04v  f. 
lic'd-ii,  1.  c.  p.  505. 

(8)     Brcjlauer  Sammlungen^  Salmon,    u.  a.  m., 
(g)     An%eigcn,    S.   295. 

(10)  Grifelinl,   am  ged;ichtcn  O.   .  .  Aimeigcn,   S,   396,   303. 

(11)  Benkli,   1.  c.      Anzeigen,   S.   395,  304. 

(12)  An  den  angef.  Oiten. 

'(13)     Slump/,  Sc/jKvcizer  Chronik,  Bl.  425.    Sic  trugciul   vil  gold   und  filbcr^ 


NOTES    to    the    Seventh     Chapter.. 

( I )    S-vuinburne's  Travels  through  Spain,    p.  230. 

{2)     Brcjlauer  Sanimluiigeii,  am   angef.   O.  .  .  Anzclgeti,   jter  Jahrg,  S.  318. 

(3)  Bcllon.  Ohjh-'vat.  Lib.  II.  c.  41.  •  .  PcyJJonncl,  Obfervalions  Hijl.  fs"  Geogr. 
p.  III.  Memoiresfiir la  Falacljic,  par  Mr.  tie Baivr,  Francfort  &  Leipz.  1778,8, 
p.  48.   u.  a.  m. 

(4)  Bellon.  1.  c.  hi  eiTones  (Zingani)  per  Grsciam,  jEgyptum  ct  reliqiuun 
Turcarum  dominium  ferrariam  artem  exercent. 

(j)  Georgii.  Pray,  Annates  Regg.  Hungaria,  P.  IV.  p.  273.  Frietkvaltlfzky., 
Miuera'ogia   TranJil'V.     P.  11.  p.  33.  feqq. 

(6)  If.huatiffi,   Hijloriar.   L.  XXII.    p.  453. 

(7)  Sivinburne's  Tra'vels  through  Spain,  p.  230. — moft  of  the  men  are  makers 
of  little  iron  rings  and  other  trifles.  Vcrgl.  Anxeigen  aus  ilen  K.  K,  ErhU 
i;rcr  Jahrg.  S.  319.  f.  GriJ'elini,  Gefihichtc  desTemefivarer  Banats,  Th,  i.S.  107. 
Others  work  in  their  huts,  making  rings,  earrings,  hooks,  neckchains,  and  other 
trifles   of  tin  or  French  plate. 

(8)  Aiizeigaiy  am  ang.   O.     Brcjlauer  Sanunlungen,  am  ang.  O. 

(9)  Anxeigcn  aus  den  K.  K.  Erbldndern,  (;ter  Jahrg.  S.  303,  3  1 8.  Grifelitii, 
Gefchlchte  des  Tern.  Banats,  S.  207. 

(10)  Carra,  Hijloire  de  la  Moldavic,  i^  de  la  Valachie,  a  JaflTy  1777,  8.  p.  186. 
lis  out  unc  forge  port;uive.      Anxeigen  aus  den  K.  K.  Erbl.   und   Grifeluu,    aa 

d<;c 


1^0  Notes  to  the  Seventh  Chapter. 

dcii  angef.   Oi'{en,       Snlze>;     Gcfchicbte  ties    Tranfalplnifcljen  Dacieiis,     atcr  Bd. 
S.  145. 

(11)  Grifellni,  am  genannten  O.  S.  207.  When  they  want  to  harden  iron, 
they  prefer  heath  faggots,  to  make  their  coals  ot.  Belloiiius,  Obfervafionum, 
Libr.  II.  c.  41.  Ipfimet  carboncs  fuos  cxcoqiumt,  ut  eos,  intelleximus,  qui  ex 
eric.-e  Jiipitihus  et  raiticibus  parantur,  ad  ejufmodi  opera  omnium  aptiffimos  effe 
cenfunt  ;      ferrum  enim   bidurare  credantur. 

(12)  jinzeigen,   S.  318.  f. 

(13)  Bellontus,  I.e.  fays,  ferrariam  artem  exercent, '  atque  inter  eos  excellcntes 
liiveniuntcr  in  ea  re  artifices,  v.  alfo.  Salmon,  gegeniviirtiger  Staat  da  T'urhifchcn 
Reichs,  Th.  i.  S.  322.  Sulzer  Gefchichtc  des  Tranfalpinifchen  Daciens,  Bd, 
2.  S.    145.   u.  a. 

(14)  Anzeigen,  am  angef.  O. 

(15)  Elen  dafelhjl,  Grifelini,  am  angef.  O. 

(16)  In  very  earfy  times,  they  muft  have  liked  dealing  in  horfcs,  as  may 
be  feen  in  XrawZj   {Seichjifche  Chronicle,  2in '^.  Kap.   2) 

(17)  Some  years  ago,  a  Gipfey,  named  David,  lived  in  Debreczin,  who  almoll 
conftantly  kept  from  fixty  to  feventy  of  the  bell  horfes,  that  were  bred  in  that 
country ;  fome  of  which  he  let  out  for  hire,  others  he  exchanged  or  fold  for 
-money.  Anxcigcn,  aus  den  K,  K.  EM.  Jahrg.  5.  S.  320. 

(18)  Elcn  das. 

(19)  Vide  Dicionario  de  las  Iciiguas  efpanola  y  francefa.  For  Franc,  Sohrino, 
T.   I.  edit.  6.  art.   Gitaneria 

(20)  Sch'-Jiedifche  Bibliothek,  Stockholm  und  Lpzg.    1729.  St.  3.  Seit  265.    f. 

(21)  Anzeigen,  aus  den  K.  K,  Erbldndcrn,  am  gedachten  O.  S.  327. 

(22)  Wolfgang  Franz,  Hifi.  Anim.  Part.  III.  Cap.  IV.  p.  580.  de  Anguilta 
(Amflelod.  1666)  Zigani  dicvmtur,  anguillas  equis  per  anum  inferere,  ut  inflati 
fali-ant,  &  alacriores  videantur. 

(23)  Anzeigen,  am  a.  O.  S.  328.  vergl.  General  v.  Bauers  Mcmoircs  fur 
la  Falaihic,  p.  24,  Carra  Hifi.  dc  la  Moldavie  t^  dc  la  Valachic,  p.  186. 
Bcnk'ii  Tranflvan.  T.   I.  p.   505.  Sulzer,  am  ged.  O. 

-(24)     Grifelini,  Seit   20:,.  u.  a.  m. 

.(2.5)     Feyjjoimcl,  Obfervations  Hifi.  et  Geogr.  p.  III.     Sulzer,  am  ang.  O.  S.  146. 

(26) 


Nfl/es  to  the  Seventh  Chaptei\  191 

(26)  Anzeigen,  jter  Jahrg.  S.  302. 

(27)  S-whii/irnc's  Travels  through  Spahi,  p.  231,  Theii"  abode  in  the  coun- 
tiy— — would  not  be  Icverely  felt,  — as  they  are  of  little  or  no  fcrvicc  in  the 
ftate,  neither  cultivating  its  lands,  Sic. 

(28)  Anzeigeit,  am  angef.  O.  S.  335.  Bcnku  Tratijil'vaii,  Tom.  I.  p.  502. 
They  tranfaded  this  kind  of  bufinefs  ia  the  military  line,  Nicholas  Ifthuanfti 
fays;  fecuti  erant  caftra  Vaivodx  (Joannis  fcepucienfis  15 13)  cjuam  pluriml 
ex  vagis  illis,  quos  Cinganos  valgus  appellat,  viliiTiraum  &  abjeftilfimum 
hominuin  genus  —  iu  Tranlilvania  &  utraque  Valachia  toitorum  iafamem  opcram. 
excrcere  folitum.  His  Vaivoda  negotium  &  curam  excarnificandoruui  cap- 
tivorum  committlt.  IJlhuanffi  Hifloriar.  Libr,  V.  p.   73. 

(29)  Toppelihi  Orig.  (s"  occai.  Tranjihan.  Cap.  VI.  p.  i;6.  Habent  etiam 
vllcs  familias  &  abonilnabilcs  ab  ipfis  Cyngaris  contemtas  unde  per  univerfam 
TranClvaniam  carnifices  iiunt,  horrendi,  crudeles,  tctri  &  iinpii.  Ifti  Cyngari 
carnifices  incredibilcra  ac  per  ulteriorem  orbcm  Chriftianum  infuetum  torturse 
modum  introduxeruiu.  Ciiininaliter  convictos,  vcl  per  fcmiplcnas  probationes 
fufpertos  nialcfoftores  traduut  in  manus  iftorum;  qui  ignes  couftruunt  prompti^ 
folles  admovent,  eifque  liti  auras  recipiunt  redduntquc,  cstcra  inftn.imenta 
ctiarn  exponuut,  forcipcs  nimirura,  virgas  fcrrcas  &  laminas,  facem  pice  im- 
pcxara,  &c. 

(30)  Anzeigen  am  a.  O.  S.  328. 

(31)  M'unjier  CoJ'mographic,  S.  370.  Angelas  Rocha,  BihUoth,  Vaticana, 
p.  364.  And,  in  den  AiiKcigen  aus  den  K.  K.  Erbliiiulern,  Seit  318.  it  is 
related  to  be  the  cuftom  among  thofe  Gipfies  in  Tranliivania  who  talk 
German,  that  the  men  neither  beg  nor  work,  but  are  maintained  and  fupported 
by  their  wives. 

(32)  Tivifs  Voyage  en  Portugal  iS  en  Efpagne,  Traduit  de  I'Anglois,  p.. 
205.     Tous  Iturs  hommes  font  voleurs,  &  Ics  femmes  proftituees. 

(33)  Belloii.  Obfervaticn.  Libr.  II.  c.  41.  Iftorum  (of  the  Gipfies) 
uxoribus  privilegio  a  Turcis  impetrato  fefe  proftituere  publice  licet  cum  Chrift- 
tianis,  turn  Turcis;  adefque  habent  in  Pera  multis  cubiculis  inftruftas,  quo 
quilibet  libere  ingrcdi  poteft,  fine  uUo  Turcici  Magiftratus  metu  :  ubi  continue 
duodena    ad  mmimum  mulieres  verfantur.     Fergl.    TurkiJ'chcn  Schauplaiz,  num. 

106. 


192,  No.'es  to  the  Seventh  Chapter. 

106.  The  Gipfey  women,  at  Pera,  have  permiffion  from  the  Sultan,  to  keep 
a  publick  brothel,  without  paying  any  tax  for  it  to  the  Sultan.  This  houfe 
was  formerly  the  cloifter  Blachcm'd  dedicated  to  the  A'irgin  Ma?y,  and  renowned 
for  the  many  miracles  worked  there.  Vide  Cantemir,  Gefch.  di's  OjmaTiifcl.\ 
Reiil's.  S.   153.  Not.   18. 

(34)  Leurs  femmcs  &  leur  fiiles  s'appliquent,  ordinaircment  a  acquerir  & 
perfeftionner  les  talents  des  Courtifanes  de  Turquie.— Elles  fe  proftituent  fouvent 
aux  paflans  ;  il  y  a  meme  dans  toute  la  Roqielie,  les  lieux  publics,  remplis 
de  fe]iinies  Bohemiennes.     Peyjfomid,  p.   1 1 1 . 

(35)  PeyJj'oiDiel,  I.e.  p.m.  Leurs  femjTies  &  fiiles  s'appliquent  ordinairement 
a  acquerir  &  perfcLtionner  les  talents,  des  Courtifanes. — La  Mufiquc  vocale  & 
ififtrumentale,  &  la  dance  iafcive.  Genauer  redet  davon  Grifclini,  am  angef.  O. 
S.  209.  Vergl.  Sulzci;  Gcfchichte  ttei  Tranfatpinifchen  Dacicns,  2ter  Bd.  S.  146. 
Anzeigen,  5tcr  Jahrg.  S.  238,  f. — Befides  other  Englifli  writers  of  travels,  (e.  g. 
Tiwfi  voyage,  p.  288.)  Siviniurnc,  p.  231.  mentions,  the  Gipfey  dances  in  Spain, 
faying  that  they  were  danced  *'  with  a  peculiar  turn  of  humour  or  tendemefs." 
An  explanation  of  which  jnay  be  found  in  the  above  quoted  writers. 

(36)  In  the  year  1628,  The  very  exiftence  of  a  Deity  was  proved  by  it  in  France. 
V.   Marini  Merfcnni,    ^lajllones  in   Gen.    Lntetuv,    1623,    p.    102. 

(37)  '•  Rodolphl  Gohlenii,  befondcre  phyjiognomlfclje  mid  chiromantifche  Anmerh. 
Aus  dem  Lat.  uberf.  Hamb.  1692,   S.  210. 

(38)  Grifelini,    am   angef.  O.    S.  207,    108. 

(39)  Tivlfs  J'oyage,  Chap.  27.  p.  205.  II  y  en  a  beaucoup  qui  ticnnent 
auberge  dans  des  villages,  &  des  petites  villes.  Davon  auch,  p.  206,  258. 
Such  Innkeepers  fometimes  even  keep  a  French  cook.  Je  logeai  a  Grenade, 
dans  une  auberge  tenue  par  des  Bohemiens  :  man  un  traitciir  Francois  nous  y 
pcrtoit  a  manger.        Khen   dai.    S.    261. 

(40)  Peyjfonnel^  am  angef.   O. 

(41)  Exercent  artes  manuarias,  quibus  fe  tuentur,  uti  et  coemundis  divi- 
<lendifque,  qias  claneulum  ad  ipfos  deferuntiir  ?ncrcibus.  Jac.  Tollii  epijiola:  Itinera?, 
Epift.  V.  p.  201. 

(42)  Jlni;eigen,    6tcr   Jahrg.    S.    14, 

.,(43)     Befihrcihing  des  Kiinigr,   Uiigarn,   S.  27,  748. 

(44)   Brejlaiifr 


Notes  to  the  Seventh  Chapter,  .        19J 

(44)  B.cJlauerSammhngcn,  1725.8.69.  Anzelgcn,  6ter  Juhrg.  S.  13.  Verg!. 
5tcr  Jahig.  S.  327.  Almana,:!} -jon  Ungarn,  vom  Jahr  17.78,  Prcfibuig,  S.  339, 
Gli/clini,   S.  207.      Ecnkii   Tranfilv.    T.  I.    p.  501. 

(4O  Pryjfomid,  ;im  angct.  O.  Sulzci;  Gefchichte  deiTranfalpinifchen  Dac:cns, 
3ier  BJ.  S.  13.  f. 

(46)  Siviii&urMe's  Travels  through  Spain,   p^23W 

(47)  The  laid  College  of  Mons,  was  eftabllflied  in  the  year  1748,  by-  the 
Emprefs  There/a,  and  received  Inftruftions,  in  the  feventh  article  of  which,  the 
Gipfies  were  allowed  the  privilege  of  wafliing  for  Gold  in  the  following  words  i 
Zingaris,  qui  ad  Ami  loturam  exercendam  privileg'mtos  in  Tranfilvania  coetus 
obtinent, . eadem  qux  ceteris  auri  lotoribus  competant  quidem  privilegia,  ne  taincn 
hxc  in  odium  dominorum  terreftriom  convertant,  in  horum  terrltoriis  non  diu- 
tiorum,  quam  auri  lotura  requireret,  moram  faciant  ;  (The  fame  article  ordains 
thus  with  regard  to  other  goldwafhers  :  Auri  lotoribus  cujufcunque  ordinis 
hominibiis  in  alpibus,  fluminibus  et  rivis  non  folum  tridui  fpatio,  fed  quoufque  illis 
libuerit,  profeffionem  fuam  excrccrc,  integrum  fit ;  neque  per  territorioruin  Patronos 
ullatenus  irapedianttir)  fccus  ad  Judicium  Montanijlicuvi  deferendi,  et  ab  hoc 
coercendi  funr.  Reliquis  autem  Zingaris,  coctibus  prafatis  non  infertis,  cxercitium 
auri  loturx  per  abfohitum  et  univcrfum  prohibitum  fit,  V.  Joffph  Benko,  TrauJil'V. 
T.  II.   §    22.  n,  1.  p.  73.  coll,  p.  501. 

(48)  Gdieral'j.  Bauer,  Memoiresfur la  Valachic,  p.  86.     Sulzer,  am  a.O.S.144. 
(49^     Anzeigen,  6ter  Jahrg.    S.  152. 

(50)  Cantemir,  BefJireibung  der  Mohlau,  ifter  Th.  in  BufJiitigs  Miigaz, 
Tom,   3.  S.   566. 

(51)  Ba-vir.  Alcmoires,  I.  c.     Sulz,er,  am  ged.  O. 

(52)  Anz.  i)t.ex  Jahrg,  S.  152.     Vergl.  Brejleuer  Sa?nml.  1725,  S.  69, 

(53)  Kcrfuch  einer  Gefihichte   des  Tern.  Baiiati,   S.  206, 

(54)  V,  von  Born,  Briefe   iiber  miner alogifche  Gegenjlandc,    S,  88, 

(55)  Bazvr,  Mi-m.     Verg.  Sulzcr,  am  anget,  O, 

(56)  Jnzc'gcn   aus  den  K.  K.  Erbldndcrn,   6ter   Jahrg,  S.   152, 

(57)  Borns  Briefe,    S.    77,    82. 

(58)  '^l^LAk.h.ndt'c Franx  Dcmjlher,  bey  Bergrabt  von  Born,  in  dea  ailgezogenen 
Briefen,  S.  88.  f. 

Cc.  (59)     'J, 


■I  54  Notes   !o  the  Scvenlh  Chapter. 

(^9)  V.  Born,  I4ter  Brief,  S.  134.  Fri((hvalilfx,ky  Mincyahg'uxTranJthoanla, 
V.  II.    §   2.   de   Ami  lotura. 

(60)  Thcfe  have  been  their  peculiar  employments,  time  out  of  mind.  All 
the  old  writers  complain  of  it,  and  even  Aventin  vents  his  dlfpleafure  in  the 
following  words.  "  The  world  is  fiill  fo  blind  as  to  he  deceived  into  a  belief 
"  that  they  (the  Gipiics)  arc  a  holy  fet  of  people,  that  whoever  injures  them 
"  mufl  be  unfortunate.  They  are  permitted  to  rob,  ftcal,  lie,  deceive  in  various 
"  ways,  fet  every  body  at  defiance,  and  difperfe  all  over  the  country.  Among 
*'  us  Healing  and  robbing  are  prohibited  under  pain  of  hanging  or  beheading, 
"  but  to  them  it  is  allowed."  V.  Amiales  Boiorum,  nach  der  Tcutfchen  ubeifetz, 
StcrB.   S.  835. 

(61)  Anzeigen,  jter  Jahrg.  S.  376.  vergl,  S.  328, 

(62)  Brcjlaner  Samml,    1725.   S.  69. 

(6-5)  M'uiijlcr  Cofmograjihie,  S.  370.  The  Gipfics  arc  a  black,  wild,  filthy 
people,  much  addifted  to  thieving,  particularly  the  women,  who  by  that  means 
provide  for  the  men.  So  likewife  Kranz,  in  fciner  SacbJiJ'Lhcn  Chroaik.  2tes  B. 
Kap.  2.  Angel,  Rocha  Bibl.  Katkan.  p.  364.  Furtis  omnino  intcnti  (Crngani) 
&i.  pr^fertim  foemtna,  es  quarum  furtis  viftus  eft  viris. 

(64)     A'izcige?!,  5ter  Jahrg.  S.  239.  319 

(6j)      Ebcn  das,  S.   2^8.    239.      Hiiiin,  -vom   Stnilf-    und  Land-hclteln, 

(66)  JirrJIatier Saninil,  i'ok  Nairn-  Kud Mcdicingefchichlen,  1721;,  S.  69.  They 
hurt  nobody,  nor  fteal  any  thing  but  iron,  &c.  S-ivini.  Travels,  p.  230.  They 
feldom  venture  upon  any  crimes  that  inight  endanger  their  lives ;  petty 
larceny  is  the  utmojl  extent  of  their  roguery. 

(on)  Philip  Tbicknefs  Relfen  durch  Frankr.  tind  cincn  tlyeil  von  Catalonien, 
nach  der  teutfchen  Ubers.  S.  162.  The  vvorft  kind  of  beggars  arc  the  fwarms 
of  male  and  female  Gipfies,  I  have  often  met  whole  troops  of  them  in  Spain, 
and  the  encounter  is  by  no  means  pleafant,  vvhcn  one  falls  in  with  them 
-on  the  road,  at  a  diftance  from  towns  or  habitations;  for  they  afk  as  if  they 
kiiew  you  could  not  refufe  them,  and  frequently  commit  murder  ivhcn  a 
convenient  opportunity  offers.  In  other  places  they  are  not  better.  With 
■regard  to  the  Gipfey  flaves  in  Moldavia,  and  thofe  parts,  Peyjfonnel  fays 
v^Ajhvations    hiJL    (sf   geograph.    p.   112) — (ju'ils    pouifent     fouvent    I'infidclitJ 

jufcjuci 


Notes  to  the  Seventh  Cbapteu  195 

jvifc]^v\M  ;i  voter  i^   ajfajjiner  Iciirs  Muitrcs.   Vergl.  Anzcig, .  l^zx  Jahrg.    S,  ^^t^^, 
360.  Giifelhii,  Siilzcr,  ii.  a.  in. 

(68)  jinzeigfK,  am  gedachten  O.  S.  360. 

(69)  Thus  the  Spanifli  Gipfies  attacked  the  city  Logrono  in  order  to. 
pUiader  it,  whi'e  the  phigue  raged  there,  and  the  inhabitants  were  weak 
and  defencelcfs.     Franc.  Ferdinand,  de  Cordova  Didafcal  multi^  p.  406. 


NOTES    to   the   Eighth   Chapter. 

(i)  Tofpeltin  orig.  ty  occas,  Trarifilvan.  C.  17.  p.  56.  Anzeigcn,  am,  a.  O. 
S.   240. 

(2)  Salmon  gegeniviirtiger  Staat  desTiirki/chen  Reichs,T\\.  I.  S.  321. 

(3)  Recoiled  the  pricft,  who  was  found  among  the  men  eaters  who  were 
arretted  in  Hungary,  and  performed  the  marriage  ceremony,  for  two  good 
grofchens  each  time. 

(4)  Toppeltin,  L  c. 

(5)  Tivij'i  I'oynge,    p.  :o^.  lis   ne  fe  marient  OjU'entrc  eux. 

(6)  Cantemir  Befihr.  der  Moldau,  Th.  2.  bey  Biifch.  Mag.  Tom.  IV. 
S.  85.  Befides  the  Moldavians,  Moldavia  is  inhabited  by  Greeks,  and  the 
fruitful  Gipfies.  Toppeltin  Orig.  (sf  occas.  Tratijil'van.  c.  VI.  p.  .56.  Adeo 
foccundi  furJ,  ut  non  fine  rifu  afpicias  felicillimas  matres  liberis  feptas,  velud 
ftipatas  gallinas  pullis. 

(7)  This  circumftance  has  given  rife  to  the  belief  that  Gipfies  had  their, 
children  babtized  in  alchoufes.  7oppeltin,  1.  c.  Infantes  en  caupona  facris  fuis 
imtiant,    quern   actum  nsfarie  Baptiimum  vocant. 

(8)  Anxeigen,   jter  Jahrg.   S,   237. 

(9)  Ahafuer.  Fritfchii  diatribe  de  Cingarorum  origine  cet  Memb.  III. 
Tiirhjcljcr  Schauplatz,  Num.  106.  Und  vorziiglich  eliie  S;ebenburgi,'ch, 
Siichfifche  Policey  verordnung,  vom  Jahr  166 1,  wo  es  heilit.  Their  (the 
Gipfies)  children  Ihall  be  baptized  only  at  the  place  where  they  were  bom, 
acd  that  fliall  be   well  authenticated,  v.  Aazeigen,  6ter  Jahrg.  S.  64 

Cc  3  (10) 


■x$6  Notes  to  the  Eighth  Chapter. 

*    (lo)     Swinburne^ s  Travels,  p.  230,  Anzeigcn,  ^ter  Jahr.  238. 
(ii)     Anzeigeti,  am  gcnannt.  O.  S.   238  —  240 

(12)  Eben  das,  S.  375. 

(13)  nomas.  DiJJert.  de  Chigaris,    §  67. 

(14)  Anzeigen,  am  angef  O. 

(15)  Siippofe  a  Gipfey,  well  diefled  after  his  fafliion,  receives  a  beating, 
or  flogging  in  the  publick  market  place,  on  account  of  fome  theft  or  other 
mifdemeanor:  he  only  divefts  himfelf  of  his  conceit  and  pride,  as  long  as 
the  punifljment  and  its  attendant  pain  laft,  but  as  foon  as  thefe  are  over, 
he  rcflefts  no  longer  on  his  fhame,  but  continues  to  entertain  jull  as  good 
an  opinion  of  himfelf  as  before,    AiiT^eigen,  ^ter  Jahrg,  -S.  373.  f. 


NOTES     to     the     Ninth     Chapter. 

(i)     In    regard     to    this    chapter    fee     T-wifs    Voyage,      chap.    27.     p. 
Anxcigcn  aus  den  K.  K.  EM,  6ter  Jahrg.  Seit   134, —  136. 


NOTES     to    the    Tenth     Chapter. 

(i)     Sdchjifche  C.hronili,   2tes   Buch,  Kap.  2.  239. 

(2)  Cofmograplne,  S.  370. 

(3)  Ajinal.  Svevic.  P.  III.  p.  384. 

(4)  Lud.  Ant.  Murator.  rerum  Italkaruni  fcriptor,  T.  XVIII.  ad  Ann. 
1422.  p.  61 1, 

(5)  Annal.  Bolor.  8tes  Buch  S.  835.  der  teutfch.  ueberf. 

(6)  Criifius,   1.  c.  p.   384,  401,   510. 

(7)  Anxeigen  aus  den  K.  K.   Erbl.  6ter  Jahr.  S.    103. 

(8)  Eben  das.  For  inftance,  the  above  mentioned  Letter  of  Licence,  given 
by  King  Uladillaus  II.  in  1496,  to  a  certain  Gipfey  Waywode,  named 
JJjomas  Polgar,  in  order   that  he  might,   with  his  hord,    be   affiftant  to   Bifliop 

■  Sisjifmund 


No/es   lo  the  Tenth  Chapter.  Tt97 

Sigiiinund,    at    Fliiifkirchen,     in  the  war.     Pray    Annal.  Rs^g-  Hung.    P.   IV. 
Lib.   IV.  ail  anil.    1496,   p.   273.  Fiicdivaldfzlcy  Mi/ieralogia,   V.   11.    p.  33.  leqc). 

(9)  Anzfigen    am    gcnannt    O.     Jof<ph   Bciik'o  Trarijil-van.    Tom.    ;.    p,   506. 

(10)  Sometimes  other  matters,  alio,  c.  g.  all  kinds  of  Smith's  Work,  as 
r.iay  be  fccn  in  the  Latin  Manufcript  containing  a  defcription  of  the  country 
of  Zips,  wherein  arc  the  following  words :  Parent  (Cingani)  fuprcmo  terrs 
fcepulicnfis  Comiti,  cul  trlbutum  annuum  pcndunt,  ac  infuper  laborcs  aliqiios 
fabriles  atri  hi  vulcani  praeftant   S.    jinzeigen,  6ter  Jahrg.   152. 

(11)  Anno  1558,  articiiclus  talis  de  iis  coiwiltus  fuerat:  Vaivodx  Cinganorum, 
j-u.xta  vetereni  confuetudineui,  a  fingulis  Clnganis  Ron  nifi  florcuum  unicum 
intra  annum  exigant ;  ad  Georgii  Feftum  denar  50,  ad  Michaelis  totidcm. 
Benkli,   1.  c. 

(12)  The  following  are  two  commiffions  of  Queen  Ifabella,  given  in  the 
year  1557,  whereby  it  appears,  that  it  was  a  particular  mark  of  favor  to  be 
appointed  Superiatendant  of  the  Gipfies. 

Litter*   pro  Waywodis  Cyganorum,    Cafparo  Nagy  &  Francifco   Balatfi. 

Ifabella  Dei  Gratia  Regina  Hungaria:,  Dalmatiae,  Croatia:,  &c.  Fidelibus 
noftris  tiniverfis  &  fingulis,  Speftabinbus,  Magnificls,  Egregiis,  Nobilibus,  item, 
Prudentibus,  &  circiunfpeftis  judicihus,  civibus  civitatum,  oppidorum  &  villa- 
rum,  &  aliorum  quorumcunque  locorum  prxfeftis,  'cunftls  ctiam  aliis  cujus 
cunque  flatus  &  conditionis  hominibus,  in  Regno  noftro  Tranlilvanii,  prasfen- 
tium  notitiam  habituris,  falutem  &  gratiam.  Quoniam  nos  ofticium  Wayvo- 
datus  Cvganorum,  in  Regno  noftro  Tranfilvanise  cxiftentium;  Fidelibus  noftrie 
egregiis  Cafparo  Nagy  &  Francifco  Balatfi,  Auls  noftr«  Familiarlbus,  una  cum 
confuetls  &  debitis  ejufdem  proventibus  clementer  dedimus  &  contulimus.  Fi- 
delitati  igitur  veftr.^  &  veftrorum  cuilibet  horum  ferie  mandamus  firmiter,  ut 
jpfos  Cafparum  Nagy  &  Francifcum  Balatfi  in  prasfcripto  officio  ipforum  ubique 
abfque  uUo  impedimento  circa  antiquam  confuctudinem  libera  procedere,  folitofque 
proventus  &  debita  Birfagia  ab  ipfis  exlgi  permittere,  quin  potius  ficubi  neceffi- 
tas  poftulet,  ipfis  adjumento  &  prsfidio  efle  debeatis  &  teneamini.  Quod  fi 
forte  quifpiam  ipfos,  Cafparum  Nagy  &  Francifcum  Balatfi,  in  proceflu  officii 
ipforum  &  perceptlone  proventuum  ex  eodem  ofiicio  Wayvodatiis  Cziganorum 
•ipfis  provcnirc  debentium,    quoquo  modo  impedire  voluerit,    ex  tunc  is  ad   1 5. 

diem, 


jpt!  Notes  to  the  Te.-'tb  Cbapte-f, 

diem,  a  die  quo  pra-'fentibus  adraouiti\s  iuerit,  in  Cuiia  nollra  Rcgiiiali,  iioftrHm- 
fcilicet  in  praElciitiain  peribnalem,  vel  prociiratorcm  fuum  legltimum  comparere- 
debeat  vol  teneatur,  radonem  fupcrinde  redditurus  efficacem.  Secus  igitur 
non  faduri,  prsfentibus  perleftis,  exliibenti  reftitutis.  Datum  in  Collolinonaftra. 
decimo  Quarto  die  Septembris,  Anno  Doniini  MlUelimo  quingcntefimo  cjuin-'- 
quagellmp  feptimo, 

Ilabella  Regina,  mppr. 

Litt.  Ifabclls    pro  Cziganorum  Wayvodls,    pro  Francifco  Balatfi   de  Kifkend., 
No3   Idibella,  Dei    Gratia,  Regina  Hungaris,   Dabnutire,  Croatia,  &;c.  memo- 
riae  mandamus   per   prsefentes,    quod,  nos     confiderantes   fidclitatem,    ac    fidcUum. 
fervitiorum  gratuita  mcrita  Egregii  D,  Balatfi  de   Kiikend  fidelis   noflrl,  qux  idem 
pro  locorum  &  temporum  diverfitate  Npbis  ii.  Serenifs.     Filio  noftro  Eltfto  Rcgi. 
Hungarize,  &c.    cum  I'umma    fidelitatis    conftantia    exhibuit    &   impendit.      Hoc 
igitur  intuitu  eundem-  in  numerum   Aulicorum  nolirorum  equis  ofto  recepimus,- 
ac  in  fortem  falarii  annualis  fui,  offigium  Wayvodatus  Pharaonum  ac  Cziganorum 
ubique  in  ambitu  havura   partium    Rcgni   noftri   Tranfilvanis,    pro  media   parte 
eidem   Francifco  Balatfi  duxiraus  dandum   &    conferendnm,    imo   damus  &  con- 
fcrimus   przel'entium    per  vigorera,    quo  circa  vobis  Fideiibus  noftris,   Egregiis   &. 
Nobilibus,     Comitibus,     Vicecomitlbus  &   Judlium,    Ca;terirque    Univcrfitatibus 
Nobilium  Siculorum  &   Saxonum,    item    officialibus,    proviforibus,   Caftellanis   &: 
vices  eorum   gerentibus,  nee  non  prudentibus   ac  clrcumfpe-ftis  Judicibus,  Juratis 
ca-terifquc  tivibus   quarumcunqvie  Civitatum,    Oppidoruni   &   vjUarum,   ubivis    in , 
praercripto    ambitu  iftiiis    Regni  Noftri    Tranfilvanici    cpnftitutis   &   exiftentibus, 
harum  ferie  mandamus  firmiter,  quatenus  dum  &  quandocunque  annotatus    Fran-, 
i.-ifcus  Balatfi,  vel  homines  ipfius,  per  cum   ad  id  deputati,  in  exigendis  cjufmodi 
provent;ibus,,  Regnum    hoc    noftrum    circumeundo   ad  vos   pervenerint,    &    tune  • 
eofdem  in  exaiflione  talium  proventuum,  ipfi  de  medio  Pharaonum  five   Czinga- 
norum,  more  ab  antiquo  debentium,  pro   n^.edia  parte  v.bique    liljcrc    ac  pacifice 
exigere  permittatis  &  permitti   modis  omnibus  facialis.    Secus  ne   fcceritis ;    prs- 
itntibus  perloftis,  exhibenti   rcllitutis.     Datum  Alba;  Julia;   in  Dominica   Cantate 
\iing. Doiliini  Miilefimo  quingeutefimo  qulnquagefimo   feptimo. 

Ifabelia  Regina. 

Theft 


Ko/es  to  the  Tenth  Chapter.     ■  jcjf) 

Thefc  Procrau'ions  did  not  prevent  the  Gipiies,  from  often  cheating  the 
Wayvodcs  of  the  tribute  due  to  them,  and  from  getting  out  of  the  way  when 
the  feafons  for  payment  came  on.     Anzeig.  6tcr  Jahrg,  S.  I32. 

(13)  Beiiliii,  1.  c. 

(14)  Toppcltbi  Orig.  i£  Bccai.  Traiijilvan.  Cap.  VI.  p.  ^7.  Anztigen,  am 
•aiigef.  O.  S.    119.  f. 

(15)  Anzeigcii,  am  geniiant.  O.  .  .  Bad-'d,  I.  c.  Toppelt.  1.  c.  p.  57.  5R, 
Confuetiidinc  noftra  reccptum  eft,  lit  idem  juftitix,  etc.  proceffiis  iioliifcuiB 
agnofcant. 

(16)  Toppctl.  I.  c.  Penes  ridiculos  iftos  Vayvodas  potcftatis  in  fuos  paruTR 
-eft.  vergl.  Anteigen. 

(17)  Anzcigen,  S.    127 

(18)  Tan  ruyn  es   el  Conte,  como  los   Gitanos.     Cor3ova,  p.  406. 
(J9)      Eben  das,  S.    128. 


NOTES     to     the     Eleventh     Chapter. 

(i)       Tiw/j    Voyage   en  Portugal  is'   en    E/'pagnr,    p.    205.     lis  ne  fuivent  ni 
profellion,   ni  cultc   rcligicux  determine.  Anzeigen  6ter  Jahrg.  S.  63. 

(z)  Peyffonnel  tbfei'vations,  p.  112.  Ces  Bohemicns  cmbraflent  la  Religion 
<les  Peuples  qui  les  fouffrent  chez  eux,  et  avec  les  quels  lis  vi-vent.  And 
'Grifelini  fays.  "  With  regard  to  religion,  the  Gipfies,  of  the  Banat,  always 
■*'  conform  to  that  church  which  is  the  prevailing  one  in  the  Village,  be  it 
"  Catholick  or  the  Greek,"  S.  Ferfuch  ciner  politifcl^en  inid  tiat.  Gefely.  des 
tTenief-jj.  Banats  Scit  200.  vergl.  Toppeltir.,  1.  c.  Jac.  Tollius  in  Epp.  itinera): 
Epift.  V.  p.  20.  and  particularly  P.  lllia  ortus  ts"  progrejfus  I'ariar.  in  Dacict 
^emt.  his  words  arc,  Rcligionem  ant  fciStam  ut  plurimum  arbitrariam  proliten- 
tur,  ac  tere  quam  heri,  aut  ii,  quorum  ope  ac  patrocinio  fruuntur.  Sunt 
llomano-Catholici,  Helvetica:  confetlionis,  &c. 

(0      L.  c.  p.   55.  feqq. 

-^4)     Anzeigen,  6tcr  Jahrg.  S.  63.  -\.   72.     Grlfclini,  am  gcdacht.  O. 

(5)   s. 


200  Noj'es  to  the  Elci'Ciith  Chapter. 

(5)  S.  oLeii,  Knp.  8. 

(6)  Jnzetgai,   ^ter   Jahrg.  S.  376. 

(7)  Schajt.  Munjicr  Cofj;ipgrapl.ue,  3tes  Biich,  Kap.  5.  S.  370.  Thefe- 
•wretched  people  —  live  like  dogs,  they  have  no  religion,  although  they  iufler 
their  children  to  receive  Chriftian  baptifm. .. .  UiVtwMc  Kranz,  8.239.  "Turliifi-ljcr 
Schanplatz,   Num.    106.     Neuerlifnctc  Ottomannifche  Pfortc,    i.  Th.  S.   113. 

(8)  Swinhiirnc's  tra-vels  thiyongi}  Upaiii,  p.  230.  Though  they  conform  to 
the  Roman  Catholick  mode  of  worihip,  they  arc  looked  upon  in  the  light  ot 
unbelievers  —  5f«^o,  1.  c.  p.  502. 

(9)  Tollii  epp.  itinera!-.  Ep.  V.  p.   201.  Rellgloncm  pras   fe   fcrunt  Graecam,, 
cum  fub   Chriftianorum    funt   dominio,    I'agani    alias,    five,    ut    vulgo   dici  folet,  , 
rcligionis  nuUius  :  neque  enim  idola  habent. 


NOTES     to    the    Twelfth     Chapter. 

(i)  Miinfter  Cof/uegr.  S.  370.  They  are  a  flrange  people,  underftand 
many  Languages.  —  Crarix,  am  angcf,  O.  —  Bdlon.  obfervationum.  Lib.  IL  c. 
41.     Angelas  Roclia,  I.e.  p.  364.  u.  a.  m. 

(2)  Cantemirs  Befihr.    der  Moldau,     z  Th.    bey   H.  B'lifcJ:,.    Magaz.  T.    IV,, 
p.    85.    y<jir.  Tollii  epp.    itinerar,    p.    201.    .    .   .    T-n'i/s  voyage,   p.     204.    Baii-r 
Memoires  J'lir  la  F'alach,  p..  22.     Grifetini,  S.   199. 

(3)  Angel.  Roc/ja  Biblioth..F.atican.  p.  364.— ^propriam  linguam  vocabulis 
flftitjis  inventis  excogitavit, 

(4)  Miinjler,  jEneas  Sylvius,  tind  nach  ihnen  Gefner  in  Mithridate,  Cap, 
V.  p.  81.  ,  .  Alfo,  lo.  Ge.  JEccard  in  differ t.  de  ufti  ijf  prajfantid  Jiudii 
etymolog.  in  hiji.  Num.   i.  u.  a.  m. 

(5)  Den  Bcweis  fehe  man  in  Gefneri  Mithridat.  p.  81.  und  ciner  Rott-ivel- 
fcben  .Grainmat.  Frankf.  a.  M.   1704. 

(6)  Tlyomafiiis,   differt.de  Cingaris,,  §    39,  affures  us  of  this   from    his    own; 
experience. 

(7)  Goropiits  bermai.  Lib.   i.  p.   18.  Kederm.  diffiit,  33.  atrs.pl'il.  probl.   t. 

(8)     Nciir 


Notes  to  the  Twelfth  Chapter.  201 

"(8)      Neue  ErSe/Lhr.  Th.    I.   .  .  .  S.    1074. 

(9)  Biionav.  I'ulcanius  de  liteiis  i£j  lingua  Getarum  feu  Gottrum  Ludg. 
Bat.  1597.  p.  102.  Camerar.  Hot:  fubccfi'V.  Cent.  II.  c.  75.  p.  297.  coll.  Valent. 
Frank  a  Frankcnjicin  Orig.  Nationum  ac  fotijjimum  Saxonicit  in  Tranjilvania. 
Helmft.  1697.  Unica  lingua  fuudamentali  utuntur,  dialefto  fing;ulis  locis 
attemperata. 

(10)  Jnzeigen,  aus  den  K.   K.   Erblandem,   6ter  Jahrg.  S.  87. 

(11)  Ft:  Foiis  Ottokorji  Orig.  Hung.  P.  I.  p.  171.  etfi  mihi  ignota  eft 
illorum  lingua;  non  cniin  quilibet  facile  earn  ab  illis  poteft  difcere,  cum 
cxperimento  mihi  conftct,  in  juventute,  nunquam  me  ab  ipfis  extorquere 
potuifle,  ut  refte  et  ordine,  Pater  Nofter  Ciganice  recitarent,  fed  recitant  vel 
lingua  Hungarica,  vel  ejus  nationis,  in  cujus   funt   medio   &c. 

(12)  Martin.  Sxentivany  dijfert.  IV.  barograph,  p.  127.  Idioma  fuum 
peculiare  habent.  (Cingani)  nuUas  tamen  literas.  It  is  reported  in  Hungary 
(Anzeig.  1.  c.  S.  22)  that  a  Gipfcy  alphabet  is  fomewhere  preferved,  but 
nobody  ever  has  fecn,  or  ever  will  fee  it,  for  it  probably  never  exifted  ; 
as  thefe  people  did  not  bring  the  art  of  writing,  from  their  own  country ; 
where  they  belong  to  a  clafs  of  people,  who,  by  exprefs  laws,  are  prohibited 
from  receiving  any  kind   of  inftruftion. 

(13)  Voyage,  p.  205.  Lcs  hommes  ont  quelques  connoiflances  fuperficielles 
en  medecine  &   en  chirurgie. 

(14)  JVagenfeil.  Pera  libror.  juven.  loculamll.  Synopfeos  Geograph.  p. 
165.  feqq. 

(15)  Sulzer  Gefchichte  des  Tranfalpinifchen  Daciens,  Bd.  3.  §  103.  S.  11, 
—  13.  Poetry  and  Mufic,  are  in  equal  efteem  among  the  Tranfalpine  Walla- 
chians,  who  have  configned  over  thefe  two  amiable  fillers,  to  the  licentioufnefs 
of  flavcs,  Gipfies.  Thefe  alone  fmg,  play,  rhyme,  for  I  cannot  allow  the 
appellation  of  poems  to  obfcene  hobling  verfes,  put  together  at  the  moment. 
By    way   of  fample,  I    flwll  quote  a   couplet. 

Mitidika,    Mitidika,    zvic'n  ung  quatfch! 

Ba   nil,   Ba  nu,    «'  am   tfche  fatj'cb. 
TWs  tfrhc    fatfch    which    Ihould   be  tjlhe  fe  fak,  is  a  monftrous  perverfion   of 
language.      Rut  t!;e   Gipfey   wanted  a   rhyme   for  qit-atfch,    fo  direAly   with   a 

D  d  bold 


202  Notes  to  the  tzvelfth  Chapter: 

bold  poetical  licence,  he  changes  the  firll  perfon  of  the  conjunctive  for  the 
third,  of  the  indicative  niood.  Thus  this  little  compolition  in  queftion  and 
anfvver,  which  fliould   be.      Little   one,  Little   one,  come  from    thence 

No,  No,  No,  No,  I  have  nothing  to  do  (there) 
he  changes  to,  I  have  nothing,  what  do  you  ? 


NOTES     to     the     Thirteenth     Chapter. 

(i)     Anzcigcn  aus  d.  K.  K.  EM.    jter  Jahrg.    S.  360. 

(2)  Peyffonnd  Obfervations  fur  hs  peuplcs  barbarei  qui  ont  habit c  Ics  bordi 
du   Danube   pag.   112. 

(3)  Anzeigen  ^ter  Jahr.  S.  374.  •  .  Sulzer,  with  refpeft  to  their  timidity, 
fays.  •'  A  Gipfcy  requires  to  have  been  a  long  time  in  the  army,  before  he 
"  can  meet  an  enemy's  balls  with  decent  Soldiers  refolution,  or  an  experienced 
"  robber,  before  he  can  take  a  traveller's  purfe,  without  having  firft  from  a 
"  bufli,  either  killed,  or  difebled  him."  I  have  more  than  once  had  experi- 
ence of  this,  in  Tranfilvania,  Wal.lachia  and  Moldavia,  where  I  have  feen, 
a  fingle  refolute  man,  with  only  a  ftick  in  his  hand,  put  half  a  Gipfey  village 
to  flight.  It  is  even  become  a  proverb  in  Tranfilvania  that,  "  you  may  drive 
*'  fifty  Gipfies  before  you  with  a  wet  rag."  Sulzer,  am  angef.  Ort.  Band 
a.  S,  141.  f.  .  .  .  Thichtefsc  found  the  Gipfies  exadly  the  fame  in  Spain.  See 
Fhil,  ThkhiejJ'e'' s  Travels  through  France  and  part  of  Cctalonia,  p,  162,  of  the 
German  Tranllation. 

(4)  Toppeltin,  Orig.  iSj    occai.    Trayfilvan.  Cap.  VL  p.   58. 

(5)  Thus  they  vowed  no  fmaller  revenge  than  death,  againft  a  refpeiflable 
German  Prince,  who  died  a  few  years  ago,  becaufe,  on  account  of  their  mif- 
dceds,  he  had  perfecuted  and  drove  them  out  of  his  territories.  They  even 
went  fo  far  as  to  offer  a  reward  among  themfelves  (probably  fomething  con- 
fidcrablc)  to  whoever  would  deliver  him  to  them,  either  alive  or  dead.  Nor 
did  they  give  up  this  infolent  dcfign,  till  fome  of  them,  who  talked  too 
openly    about   it   in  the   Duvmftadt  doniinions,   were  taken  and  being  delivered 

up. 


Notes  to  the  Thirteenth  Chapter,  203 

up  ro  the  parties  concerned,    paiJ   the    forfeit  ot"    their    lives,    for   their  good 
intentions. 

(6)  Anzelgen,   Jtcs  Jahr,   S.  375. 

(7)  Eben  das,  S.   288.  374.  f.     T'oppcltirt,   1.  c.  Cap.   VII.  pag.   57. 

(8)  Kelpiui  in  natat.  Saxonum  Tranjilii,  Cap.  II.  §  14.  not.  c.  adtually  avcrSt 
vix  exftat  fub   fole   magis   hoc  populo   fuperba  natio. 

(9)  Suppofe  a  perfon,  in  their  way,  well  drefTed,  ftiould  be  publicly  beat 
or  whipped,  for  a  theft,  or  fome  other  crime,  he  would  only  lay  afide  his 
conceit  and  pride,  while  the  punifliment,  and  the  confcqucnt  pain  lafted  ; 
thefe  being  over,  he  no  longer  remembers  his  difgrace,  but  entertains  as 
good   an  opinion  of  himfelf  as   before.     Anxcig.  jtes    Jahr,    S.  373.  f. 

(10)  Eben  das,  S.  374.  contains  this  remark.  Thefe  people  are  loquacious 
and  quarrelfome  to  the  greateft  degree.  —  They  feldom  make  much  noife  in 
their  huts,  in  which  they  generally  keep  quiet  enough ;  but  in  the  publick  markets, 
and  before  alehoufcs,  where  they  are  furrounded  by  a  number  of  fpeitators, 
they  bawl,  fpit  at  each  other,  catch  up  flicks  and  cudgels,  vapour  und  brancMi 
them  over  their  heads,  throw  duft  and  dirt,  now  run  from  each  other,  then 
back  again,  with  furious  geftures  and  threats.  The  women  fcream,  drag  their 
hufbands,  by  force  from  the  fcene  of  aftion,  thefe  break  from  them  again  and 
return  to  it,  the  children  too  howl  pitcoufly.  At  laft,  after  all  thefe  agitations, 
they  do  no  damage,  to  each  other.  —  Only  now  and  then,  the  remains  of 
the  torn  (hirt,  is  entirely  ftrlpped  off.  After  a  fhort  time,  without  any  perfons 
interference,  when  they  have  cried  and  made  a  noife  till  they  are  tired,  the 
affair  finiflies  Itfelf,  and  they  feparate,  with  as  much  oftentation,  as  if  they  had 
performed  the  moft  heroic  feats. 

(11)  DiJJert.  de  Cingaris,    §    27,   28. 

{12)     Stumpf  Scl>weizer  Chronik,  Buch  8.   Kp.    10.  Bl.  42!;.  b, 

(13)  Stiimpf,  am  gedacht.  O.  fays  himfelf,  "This  unprofitable  rafcally  fet, 
"  who  go  about  in  our  time" — of  tvhich  the  bejl  is  a  thief,  for  they  live  en- 
tirely by  f  eating, 

(14)  Aventinus,  Annates  Boior.  Buch  8.  S.  835,  der  Teutfch.  Ucberf.  unj 
Kran'z.,  in  der  Sdchfifchen  Chronili,  B.  2.  K.  2.  Bl.  239.  b.  Likewife  die  Chronik 
•von  Bologna  beym  jahr   1422,     defcribes  them   as  a  fet  of  people   luho  lived  by 

D  d  2  plunder. 


2C4  Notes  to  the  Thirteenth  Chapter. 

plunder.  V.  L,Uil.  A/t!on.  Muratori  fLriptorci  rcrum  Ilalicar.  Tcill.  XVIII.  p.  6ii, 
— That  Stumpf,  may  in  other  refpetts,  be  worthy  of  credit,  and  really  followed  Ibme  old, 
though  to  us  unknown,  account,  is  no  reafon  that  he  fliould  be  believed,  in  preference 
to  every  other  author, equally  refpetlable,  as  Thomajius  thinks.  Though  he  might  not 
get  his  information  from  mere  hcariay,  it  is,  neverthelefs,  evidently  of  no  validity. 
Its  author  was  influenced  by  the,  formerly,  common  prejudice,  that  the  Gipfies  were 
Egyptian  pilgrims,  who  were  conftrained  to  wander,  from  their  native  country,  on 
account  of  religion.  He,  like  many  others,  elleemed  them  an  holy  fet  of  people. 
When  he  heard  accounts  of  all  forts  of  irregularities  pradiled  by  thefe  people,  and 
might,  once  or  twice,  be  an  eye  witnefs  ot  their  purchafirtg  provifions,  it  huit  him  to 
find  thefe  righteous  pilgrims  fo  cried  down,  efpeciallv  as  he  accounted  to  himfclf 
how  they  might  get  money,  without  either  earning  it  or  Healing ;  namely,  if  they 
had  remittances  from  their  own  country.  Therefore  in  order  to  vindicate  them  to 
the  utmoft,  he  took  the  fair  fide  of  the  qucftion  ;  acquiefced  In  the  idea  that  they 
adually  did  receive  money  from  their  friends  at  home,  with  which  they  paid  ho- 
neftly  for  every  thing:  he  even  praifed  them  for  their  chriftian  difcipline  and  order. 
Siehe  Stumpf  an  der  angef.  Stelle.— r-Whoever  thinks  this  improbable  may  confult 
Aventinus,  who  grieves  that  the  Gipfies  Ihould  fo  generally  be  reckoned  hdly, 
when  they  are  a  fet  of  arrant  thie'ves  and  robbers. 

(15)  That  excellence  they  brought  from  their  own  country,  and  did  not  learn 
it  here. 

(16)  Anzeigen,  6tcs  Jahr,  S.  22,  23. 

(17)  It  often  happens  that,  after  they  have  got  over  the  moft  tedious  trouble- 
fome  part,  and  are  proceeding  to. the  higher  branches  of  knowledge,  their  courage 
fails,  they  abandon  the  whole  fcheme  and  plan  which  they  had  formed,  return  to 
their  own  people  and  filthy  habitations,  neglcft  and  forget  the  little  they  had  learned  ; 
and  afterwards  endeavor  to  gain  a  livelihood  by  horfedealing,  mufic,  or  in  fome  other 
way.     Anzeigen,  am  gedachten,  O.  S.  23. 

(18)  Anzeigen,   Jtes  Jahr,  S.  335.     Frid-ivald/zky  Mineralog.  p.  II.  §  2. 

(19)  T-xvifs  Voyage  en  Portugal  l^  en  Efpagne,  Ch.  XXVII.  p.  205.  On  ne 
leur  permet  pas  de  poffeder  aucun  terrein  en  propre,  ni  de  s'enroler  dans  les  armees. 
Alfo  Siviniitrne^s  Travels  through  Spain,  p.  231. 

(20)  Lad.  Tiirocii  Hungaria/uiscum  Regiius,  p.  265,  66. 

(21)   IJh,u»,Ji 


No.'fS  to  the  Tinrtcentb  Chapter.  205 

(•0   IJihuar.JillijIoriar.   Libr.  XXH.   p.  453. 

(12)   Gc.  Pray  Annates  Rejourn  Hungar.   P.  IV.  p.  273..     Ftid-valc!fzky,\,  c. 

(23)  Thomajius  in  DiJJert.  tie  Cingaris,    §69. 

(24)  Schudt  Mu)iorahilia  JiiJaica,  Lib.  V.  c.  13.  Holl/erg,  yndifthe  Gefc/jkhte. 
Ueberfetzt  von  Aug.  Detharding.     Th.  2.  698.  ^ 

(25)  ?>\t\iA/izeigcn,  6tes  Jahr,.Scit  39,  f.  46,  f,. 

(26)  Anzeigen,  4tcs  Jahr,  S.  343. 

(37)  Particularly  of  the  Chriflians  to  the  Turks. — Aventinus  fays  \\\  the  pafTige 
before  quoted,  "  It  is  known  that  the  Gipfies  are  Turkifli  traytors. — They  are  ac- 
cufed  of  it  in  the  State  Papers  of  former  centuries,  as  will  be  feen  occafionally  in  the 
following  chapter. 

(28)  Scl}-ivabiJ'chc  Anrmten,   S.  426. 

(29)  Anzeigcn,  6tes  Jahr,  S.  39,  40, 

(30)  Eben  das,   5ter  Jahrg.  S.   247. 

(31)  S.  Ortelii  Redivivi  et  continuati  Wimderharcr  Adlers  Sch'Uiiung,   Seit3i3. 
(32J  Aadr,  Stiibet,    Hiingaria,  oder  7!cue  vollfidndige  Befchreibung  des  ganzen 

Ka/tigreictjs  Ungarn,  S.  748. 


NOTES     to     the     Fourteenth     Chapter. 

(i)   S.Gerhard  Loc.  de  Magijtr.  Num.227.     Olear.     Zigeuner  frag,  quaefl.  5, 

(2)  Bodin  de  Republic.  Lib.  V.  c.  2.     Keckermann.  Difpiitt.XXXlll.     Curfui 
Philofoph.     Probl.  2.  u.  a.  m. 

(3)  He  began  what  P/^//:/  III.  compleated  in  16 10,  and  expelled  70,000  nov 
only  Jewiih  but  Moorifh  families. 

(4)  BodinusX.c.  Camerar.  Hor./ubcejiv.  Cent.  II.  Cap*  LXXV.  p.  297. 

(5)  Franc.  Ferdinatid.  Cordova  Didafcal multip.  p.  406. 

(6)  Sivinburne's  Travels  through  Spain,  p.  231. 

(7)  Cordova,   I.e. 

{'&)  Pu/quier  Recherche!  de  la  France,  Livr.  IV.  Ch.  19.  p.  361.     Bodin.  I.e. 
Camerar,  I.  c. 

(9)  Thiian, 


2.ot>  Notes  to  the  Fot'.rteenth  Chapter. 

(9)  Thuan.  continuat,  Libr.  V.  p.  260. 

(10)  Siirii  C.ommenfar.  Rcrum  in  orhc gejlarum,  ad  ami.  1572. 

(11)  Thomnfii Dijert.  de  Ciirgar.  ^  62. 

(12)  Salmon  heutige  Hijiorie,  oder,  gegeniuiirtiger  Staat  des  T'urkifchen  Reichs. 
Th.  I.  S.  320  f. 

(13)  Lex.  Dan.  Lib.  III.  Cap.  20.  Art.  3.  Lud.  von  Holberg,  Judifchc  Gefch, 
Th.  1.  S.  695. 

(14)  Schwedlfchc  Biblioth.     Stockholm  imd  Leipz.  1729.     Drlttcs  St.  S.  265  f. 

(15)  Laet.Inh-oit  Brabant. — Addit.  11.  An.  VI. 

(16)  Sammlung  der  Reichfabfchiede,  Frankfort  am  Mayn,  1747.  Th.  2.  Seit 
^°-  344-  509-  602.  622.  623.     Th.  3.  Seit  394. 

(17)  Am  angefiihrten  Orte,  Th.  2.  S.  622.  623. 

(18)  Only  in  the  cities  of  Mens,  Neufahl,  Kremnitz,  Schemnitz,  &c.  no  Gip- 
fey  dare  appear,  on  account  of  the  gold  and  filver  mines ;  but  this  prohibition  ex- 
tends to  the  Jews  alfo.  Anzeigcn,  6ter  Jahrg.  S.  157.  .  .  .  Bel.  {not.  Hungaria 
wo-jitj  T.  1.  p,  86)  informs  us  they  are  obliged  to  keep  away  from  Tyrnau 
likewife. 

(19)  Cum  ifthoc  hominum  genus  (fcilic.  Cingari)  furandi  artem  palam  profi- 
teatur,  non  fine  ingenti  Magiftratuum  fit  ignominia,  qui  eos   non  ftatim  remh  i<el 

glebit  addkunt.  GoroJjT.  Becan.  Hermathcn.   Libr.  I.  pag.  18. Ecquis  negare  aufit, 

e  publica  re  magls  futurum,  fi  vegeti  ii  Zigeni,  qui  otiofe  vagari  ac  mendicare  con- 
fueverunt,  vel  quos  fuftigatio  et  exilium  refta  via  ad  patibulum  ducit,  infervituiem 
raperentm;  et  publtcis  operibus  addicerentur  ?  Be/old.  Colleg.  Politic.  Cap.  10. 
§  6.  n.  56. 

(20)  It  is  no  contnidiftion  to  my  aficrtion,  concerning  the  generality,  that  there 
snay  be  a  few  particular  exceptions  in  Tranfilvania. 


NOTES     to     the     Fifteenth     Chapter. 

(i)  Only  in  fome  places,  although  the  Imperial  orders  were  fent  to  every  part  of 
Hun_gary — they  were  only  attended  to  in  the  jiiftriift  of  Prefzburg. 

(2)  The 


Notes  to  the  Fifteenth  Chapter.  207- 

(♦)  The  following  is  the  regulation,  in  the  original  language  and  ordei-,  taken 
frnin  the  manufcript  delivered  to  me  from  the  Reglfter  of  the  Imperial  Royal 
Decrees. 

(Circularcs  fiib  Nro.  6525.  d.    12  Septembris   1782.) 
De  Regulatione  Zingarorum. 

Inter  plurinias,  quibus  facratiflima  fua  Majeftas  ad  Magni  hujus  Principatus  fta- 
tum  beatiorem  reddendum  detinetur,  curas,  eo  quoquepaternam  fuam  foUicitudinem 
benignecjnvcrteredignatacft,  quo  vaga,  et  per  univerfum  Magnum  hunce  I'rinci- 
patum  difperfa  gens  Zingara  ad  certa  et  fixa  domieilia  reduccreter,  ac  per  doniici- 
liationem,  tam  ad  veilitum  cultiorem,  quam  vel  maxime  ad  politiorem  vita?  modum 
morefqne  honeftos  traduceretur,  prlncipiifque  religionis  et  vilx  focialis  imbucrctur. 
Ad  quern  fcopum  adfequendum  vigore  Benigni  Sui,  die  i4ta  fuperloris  Menfis  Au- 
gufti  exarati  decreti  Regii  normam,  quoad  ipfam  mentionatoe  gentis  Zlngarie  regula-( 
tionem,  in  Regno  Hungariae  ftabilitam,  ifthic  quoque  introducendam,  et  ad  circum- 
ftantias  hujus  Principatus  adaptandam,  clemcntcr  prscepit.  In  cujus  Altilfims  Vo- 
luntatis complementum,  ordinandum  Dominationibus  Vcftris  invenit  Rcgium  Guber- 
nium,  quatenus  omnes  et  fmgulos  illos  Zingaros,  qui  fub  diverforum  Dominorum 
Terreftrium  jurifdi6tione  commorantur,  ad  fixa  domieilia  et  jurifdiftionem  alicujus 
Domiiu  Terreftris  confcribant,  eifquc  divagationem  et  fub  tentoriis  habitationem 
ferio,  et  fub  incurfione  poena  corporalis,  interdicant;  et  pra:terea,  cum  pra;videri 
non  poffit,  eofdem  Zingaros  in  cives  patriae  utiles  aliter  tranfmutatum  iri,  quam  fi 
prius  mores  eorumdem  modemi  penitus  exuantur,  iiquc  principiis,  tam  ad  anim:E 
falutem,  quam  etiam  humanum  commcrcium  neceffarlis,  imbuantur  ;  quoad  pro  iiide 
anima  fahitem  fequentia  iifdem  Zingaris  prx-fcribenda  conftituuntur  principia  ut 

I.  In  iis,  quae  ad  fidem  necelTaria  funt,  femet  erudiri  curent,  prolefquc  fuas  a  te- 
neris  adhuc  imbuant. 

II.  Nuditatem  proliiim,  quaqua  poflunt  ratione,  tegant,  nee  per  lllarum  nudi- 
tatem,  five  domi,  five  iu::ta  vias  publicas  ac  per  plareas,  tranfeuntibus  abominan- 
diim  prsberi  fpeftaculum  fmant. 

III.  In  fuis  habitaculis,  fexus  diverfitate  obfervata,  fcparationem  infdtuant  ;  ut 
gravilTima  mala  deinceps  pro  poflibili  averti  poirmt. 

IV.  Ecclefias  frequentent,  diebus  prxfertim  dorainicls  et  feftivis,  et  figna  Chrit- 
tians  pietatis  exhibcant. . 

Y,  Certis 


2o8  ^ole  to  the  Letter. 

V.  Certis  Antiftitibus  femet  fubjiciant,  eorumque  diiedlloni  aft'iones  fuas  con- 
■forment. 

^ioad  vera  humanum  tommercium  ct politiorcm  inta  modum  haec  adhuc  prsefcri- 
'biuitur,  lit 

I.  In  viftu,  veftitu  et  lingua,  femet  illi,  cujus  apud  Incolas  loci,  quo  degunt, 
ufus  eft,  conforment;  ab  animalium  proinde  pereuntium  cfu  abftineant,  Teftituni 
varium,  et  linguam  propriam  relinquant. 

II.  Pallia,  qu.-E  condendis  rebus  furtivis  preopportuna  funt,  penitus  deponant. 

III.  Equis  nulli  Zingarorum,  praeter  aurilotores,  licitum  erlt ;  fed  et  his. 

IV.  Permutationes,  occafione  nundinarum,  interdiftse  fint. 

V.  Pagorum  Judicibus  ferio  imponatur,  ne  Zingaros  otiofos  efle  iinant,  fed  fi  do- 
mefticum,  aut  dominalem,  laborem  nullum  habuerint,  alienum  pro  mercede  pera- 
gere  cogantur. 

VI.  Ruralibus  prasfertim  laboribus  afluefiant :  hinc  etiam. 

VII.  Ubi  fieri  poteft,  eo  res  dirigatur,  ut  Domini  Terreftres,  eofdem  Zingaros 
recepturi,  terras  etiam  illis  colendas  aliquas  allignent,  et 

VIII.  Qui  labores  campeftres  fegnius  peragerent,  poenam  corporalem  fubeant. 

IX.  Exercitium  tunc  tantum  illis  concedatur,  dum  tempus  non  admittit,  run 
laborare,  quod  etiam  ratione  muficorum  intelleftum  efto. 

Haec  itaque  pivio  mode  prsfcripta  Dominationes  Veftrx  ad  omnium  et  fmgulorum 
In  fuo  circulo  reperlbilium  Zingarorum  notitiam  publicari,  adque  eorumdem  intellec- 
tum  interpretari,  curabunt,  debitae  eorumdem  obfervantise  fedulo  invigilaturae,  ac  in 
contravenientes  condigne  animadverfurae. 


NOTE     to     the     Letter. 

This  writing  is  to  be  found  in  the  oft  mentioned  Gazettes,  (6ter  Jahrg.  Sell  i66, 
i68).  It  is  addreffed  to  the  Editor  of  thole  ufeful,  but  alas!  for  feven  years  paft 
idifcontlnued,  periodical  iheets.  It  merits  a  place  here,  as  it  ferves  by  way  of  afhort 
review,  and  alfo  as  an  additional  confirmation  of  many  of  the  before  recited 
.particulars. 


SECTION 


(       209       ) 

SECTION        IL 

NOTES     to     the     First     Chapter. 

(i)   Kranz,  Sacljfi/che  Chronik,  Buch  XI.  K.  2.  BI.    ^39.     Sebafi.  MU/iJcr,  Co/- 
mographie,  Buch  III.  Kap.  5.  Seit  370. 

(2)  Stitmpf.  Schweitzer  Chronik.  Buch  VIII.  Kap,  10.  ^!.  245.  Guler,  Be- 
Jchreib/ittg  von  Graubiindten,  Buch  X.  Blatt  156.  b. 

(3)  Lud.  Anton.  Miiratori  Annali  tV Italia,  Tom.  IX.  pag.  1 10.  And  Chronica 
di  Bologna,  Tom.  XVIII.      Rerum  Italitarum,  ad  Ann.  1422. 

(4)  Franc.  Ferdinand  de  Cordova  Didafcal  multipl.  pag.  409^^ — 411.  Alfo  i^/<Ir^ 
Delrio  Difquijitionum  magicar.  Tom.  II.  L.  IV.  cap.  3.  p.  205. 

(5)  Pa/quier  Recherches  de  la  France.  L.  IV.  ch.  19.  p.  361. 

(6)  Annali d' Italia,  Tom.  IX.  p.  iio. 

(7)  Rertan  Itallcar.  Tom  XVIII.  ad  Ann.  1422-. 

(8)  Simon.  Majoll  Dierum  cankularliim,  Tom.  III.  coUoq.  2.  pag.  631.  Sane 
hoc  conftat,  quod  Ferdinandus  olim  Rex  Hifpanix  fexaginta  dies  illis  deflinavit, 
intra  quos  omnino  Hifpania  excedere  jubebantur. — Ab  eo  tempore  hinc  inde  vagan- 
tur  in  Germania.  Others  are  of  the  fame  opinion,  e.  g.  Mart.  Szentivany  Dlffert, 
Horographica  IV.  p.  227. 

(2)  Certe  primum  omnium  in  Moldavia,  Valachia,  ac  Hungarla,  circiter  annum 
141 7  vifi  funt,  ifthincque  in  alias  Europa;  ditiones  propagati.  Georg.  Pray  Annates 
Regum  Hungarla,  P.  IV.  p.  275.  AHb  Grlfellnl,  Gefchichte  dcs  Temefwarcr  Ba- 
nats.  S.  212. 

(10)  At  this  time  [1439]  the  Gipfies  made  their  firfl  appearance  in  thefe  parts. — — 
A  parcel  of  rafcals,  a  congregated  herd,  from  the  confines  of  Hungary  and  Turkey. 
Aventln.  Schwdblfche  Annalen,  Buch  8.   Bl.  418.  b. 

(11)  foann.  Ge.  Eccardl  Dijfert.  de  ufu  et  prajlantla  Jludli  etymologlci  In  hljlorla. 
Cap.  I.  Cingaros  primum  in  Polanlam  trajecifle,  ex  ipforum  apud  Munfterum 
Klatione  conjcio,  poftea  Walachi;e  Tranfilvanisquc  fcfc  infuderunt. 

E  c  (12)  •! 


2IO,  isates  to  the  Flrji  Chapter, 

(12)  I  am  of  opinion,  and  perhaps  it  is  all  we  can  fay,  with  certainty,  concernin^^ 
their  arrival  in  Europe,  that  they  made  their  iirft  appearance  in  Dacia ;  probably  it 
was  in  Tranfalpine  Ducia  that  they  firft  entered  our  part  of  the  world  ;  whether  they 
tame  from  Perfia,  Afia  Minor,  or  Egypt.     Si/lzcr,  Befchrnbun^desTranfalpmifchoi 
Baciens,  Band  2.  S.  143.     AUb,  Pray  Annales   Reg^-    Hitngar,  1.  c. 

(13)  Caiitemir,  Eejlhreibung  dcr  Molclau.  2ter  Theil,  im  BY'fdnvgifckoi  Ma-- 
gaz'iti,  Th.  4.  S.  85. 

(14)  Second  Chapter,  pag.  6. 

(15)  Muratori  Scriplorei  rcrum  Italkar,  T.  XVIII.  ad  Ann.    1422.     Quando  . 
coloro  arrivarono  in  Bologna,  erano  andati  cinque  anni  pel  mondo. 

(16)  IFilhelm  Dilick,  in  Mii  Hefztfchen  Chronik.  Seit  229.  beyrn  Jahr  1414,  cer- 
tainly does  fay,  that  they  arrived  the  fame  year  in  the  Heffian  territories ;  and  Fa~ 
hrithis,  in  y^««rt//^^.  ili?/}/.  fays  they  were  driven  from  Meiffen  in  1416.  But  (?«/- 
vijiiis  contradifts  Fahritiiu,  and  has  correfted  his  date,  putting  1418  for  1416. 
And  with  regard  to  Dilich,  there  mud:  either  have  been  a  miftake  in  the  manufcript, 
from  which  he  corapofed,  or  he  muft  have  read  wrong  ;  there  being  no  mention 
made  of  Gipfies  in  any  of  the  public  prints  till  three  years  afterwards,  viz,  141 7. 
There  is  no  reafon  to  believe  they  fliould  remain  invifible  to  eveiy  other  pcrfon  both 
in  and  out  of  Germany,  at  the  fan.e  time  have  appeared  to  the  editor  of  D/Z/V/j's 
intelligence. 

(17)  Stumpf  and  G/ilcr  mention  them  this  year  m  Switzerland  and  an\ong  the 
Grifotis,  alfo  HeJio  Paralip.  ad  Urfperg.  pag.  402.  Crujlus  in  feinen  Schisjabifchen 
Annalen  Seit  345,  384.  Spangenherg  in  der  Mansfeldijchen  Chronili,  S.  357; 
GUlichfche  Chronik.  Blatt  263,  und  bey  2^«7/cr,  Brief  71.  S.  197;  Heidenrcichs 
Le.'pziger  Chronik.  S.  62.  u.  a.  m. 

(18)  Andreas  Prejlytcr  Ratijhonerijis  in  C.hron.  Bavar.  p.  122.  Eodcm  anno 
(1433)  venerunt  ad  terram  nofiram  quidam  de  populo  Ciganorum,  qui  dicebant,  fe 
cll'e  de  iEgypto. 

(19)  A'veiitin,  Buch  8.  Blatt  41 8  b. 

(20)  Kranz  Sachifche  Chronik.  iites  Buch,  Kap.  2.  Blatt  239  b.  Mihijler  Cof- 
mographie,  Buch  3.  Kap.  5.  S.  370.  Auch  Stiimpf  und  Guler  an  den  ange- 
fvihrten  Scellcn.  u.  a.  m. 

(21)  Cnifius  Annal.  Suet',  pag.  346, 


Notes  to  the  Second  Chapter.  '21T 

(ji)  V.  luprapag.  53. 

(23)  Slump/,  am  angcf.  Ort.  31.4255.  In  this  year  [1418]  the  Glpfies  firft 
arrived — in  SwitzcrUmJ,  near  Ziirich,  and  other  places. — Their  number,  including 
men,  women,  and  children,  amounted  to  14,000,  not  in  one  troop,  but  difpcrfcd 
up  and  down. 

(24)  Thofe  which  went  to  Bologna  amounted  to  about  one  hundred  people. 
Thomas  Polgar's  gang,  which  obta'med  the  paflport  from  King  Uladillaus  the 
Second,  in  Hungary,  in  1496,  confilled  of  twenty -five  tents,  or  fo  many  diftim^ 
families;  aiid  probably  even  thofe  who  encamped  near  Ziirich  did  not  greatly  exceed 
two  hundred:  for  in  1422,  they  were  feen  again  near  Bafil,  and  there  JVurJiifcii 
mentions  the  circumftance  that  they  Imd  about  ffty  horfes  imth  them.  From  whence 
we  may  conclude  that  there  were  about  as  many  families ;  fmce  no  travelling  Gipfcy 
family  at  this  time  has  or  ufcs  more  than  one  horfc. 

(25)  ChriftianWurftifens  BafzlerChronik.  Buch  4.  S.  240. 

(26)  Dijfert.  deChigaris,  §26.  Gw/fr  mentions  only  fourteen  Aa«</«</;  that  his 
therefore  looks  upon  as  a  miftake,  and  infills  that  there  alfo  it  fliould  be  read  fourteen 
thoufand. 

(27)  Kraiix,  Miinjier  wiA  Stump/,  an  den  angefuhrten  Orten. 

(28)  Kra7tz  am  gedacht.  Orte. 


NOTES     to    the    Second     Chapter, 

(i)  Kranz  Sdchji/che  Chronik.  iites  Buch.  Kap.  2.  Blatt  239  b.  Miinfter  Co/ 
Magraphie,  Buch  3.  Kap.  j.  S.  370.  Stump/  Buch  8.  Kap.  10.  Blatt  425. 
Auch  Guler,  Bl.  156.  und  Cordova,  S.  408.  Pa/^uier  Rccherches  de  la  France, 
L.  IV.  Ch.  19.  p.  361. 

(2)  Muratori /riptores  rerum  Italicar,  T.  XVIII.  ad  Ann.  1422. 

(3)  Aventin,  B.  8.  Blatt  418  b.     IVurfti/eii  B a/z.ler  Chronik.  B.  4.  Seit  249. 

( 4)  Miinjier  Co/mographie,  am  angef.  Orte. 
^5)   Bey  Cordova,  S.  408. 

E  e  2  (6)  Muratori 


Z  I  2 


Notes  to  the  Second  Clapter. 


(6)  Mnralorl  Rcntm  Italicar.  T.  XVIII.  ad  r.ua.  1422.  Aveano  Un  decieto 
del  Re  di  Ungherla,   che  era  Imperadore,   &:c. 

(7)  Tofpelthi  orig'incs  ct  occaf.  Tranjclvjni.e,  pag-.  57.  Qjid.im  (Vayvoda) 
jpforum  (Cingarorum)  cuftodit  privilegia  olim  a  Bathoriis  Principibus  ipfis  coUata^ 
His  cautum  efTc  aiunt,   gravi  prena  eos  fubeiTe,    qui  innocentes  injuria  afSeiafit, 

(8)  Matth.    TFehner,    Ohfcrvafiones  prafiica-.  fvib  voc.  Zigeunir. 
{())   Crtijius   S.  384.     Wnrftifen,    Scir  240.     Giikr,   156,  b. 

(10)  Am  gedachten  Ortc,   §  27. 

(11)  Diatribe  Jnjiorico-politica  tie  Zvgenontm  origine,  'vita  ac  Jitorihia. 
Auftore    Ahafuer.   Frit/ebio.     Membr,   IV. 

(12)  The  like  circuraftance  is  mentioned  \i\  Pet.  Fridcr,  Mn-Jan.  tic  viandat. 
Lib.  II.  cap.  48.  num.  7. 

(13)  I.e.  Aveano  un  decreto  del  Re  di  Ungherla — per  vigore  di  cul  poteaao- 
rubare  per  tutti  que'  fette  anni  per  tutto  dove  andafleio,  e  che  non  potefle  eflcre 
fatta  lore  giuftizia. 

(14)  On  account  of  an  ancient   apoftacy  from  the  Chriftian  religion. 

(15)  Aventin,  am  angef.    Ort. 

(16)  Sammlung  der  Reiehs  Ahfchiede,  Frankf.  am  Mayn,  1747.  T.  11. 
S.  622,  623. 

(17)  Miinjler,  Stumpf,   und   GuUr,  an  gedachten   Orten. 

(18)  Martin  Delrio  Difquifitionum  magicar.  T.  II.  L.  IV.  c.3.  quaeft.  5, 
p.  208. 

(19)  S!ti(?>ipf  wxii.  Ciller,  an  den  angefUhrten  Stellcn.  Crufiits,  Seit.  345. 
Fortnnat.  Sprecher  Pall.  Rhat.   Libr.  III.  pag.  91. 

(20)  1.  c.   §  28. 

(21)  Thomajius,  1.  c.  §  27,  An  autem  furacitatem  quoque  et  praefligias, 
quibus  hodie  maxime  infamantur,  primo  ftatim  ingreflu  fuo  exercuerint,  haud' 
immerito  amblglmus.  Si  enira  tales  fuiflent,  non  ihipetrafient  falvi  conducftus 
literas. 

(22)  For  no  writer  prior  to  Stumpf  (e.  g.  die  Chronik  von  Bologna,  Aventin, 
11.  a.  m.)  defcribe  them  in  any  other  manner, 

(23)  What  a  fet  of  rabble  oft  united  themfelves  to  the  Gipfies  in  Spain,  formerly, 
jnav  be  fccn  in  La  Fida  di  Lazarillo  de  Tormes,  Part  II.'  cap.  12.  p.  3 14.    Concern- 
ing 


Notes  to  ih^  fhiid  Cljcipiei,  ?.i^ 

ing  the  like  tircumlhnces  in  Gcnutuiy,  SchudtMemoralll.  JuJak,  Lib.  V.  c,  13, 
l^ud.  •von  Holberg  JiiJifihc  Gcfchichtey  n.ich  dcr  teutkheii  Ui;bt^rctiu:ig,  iter  Th. 
ijtes  Buch,  S.  69;. 


NOTES     to     the     Third     Chapter. 

(l)  M,Trquard.  Frcier.  not.  ad  Chronic.  Andrere  Ratijlonenjis-,  pag.  224.  Ego 
a  planis  et  erronibus  illis,  quos  Attinganos  Grsci  nominabant,  dc'.'cenJere  (Cinga- 
nos)  puto.  Cfr.  Peuccr.  Commentarius  divinationum,  (edit.  Wittemb.  ijSo,)  p.  160, 
Phil,  Loniceri  Promtuar.  Hondorf.  pag.  84.  Pcyjfonnd,  in  his  Ohj'ervatlons  Hijlo- 
riquei  et  Geographlqites  fur  Us  petiphs  barbares  qui  ont  habile  Its  iordi  dii  Danube 
t^  du  Pont  Euxin,  pag.  109,  iio,  likewife  deduces  them  from  the  Athingans, 
which  he  defcribes  as  a  feft  derived  from  the  Manich^ans. — Athingans,  d'ou  eft  venu 
par  corruption  le  nom  du  Tchingenes,  que  leur  (to  the  Gipfies)  donnent  encore  les 
Turcs,  et  les  autres  nations  de  I'Orient.  Among  their  other  herefies,  one  was  their 
averfion  to  touch  another  perfon,  or  to  take  any  thing  from  them,  fearing  they 
fliould  thereby  be  defiled.  'A^iyfavs;  foys  the  Editor  of  the  Etymolog,  Magn. 
0  |/.t)  ^iKuii  TiK  TirfJoofyricrai;  aVo  re  Siyfavw  ;  ol  ya,f  Tiv  OLicim  xoi.h\r,y  iyovlsf, 
aiJev  trap' aA/K  >a'J.?>v!»;r(.  The  above  cited  authors  could  not  have  recollefted; 
this  circumftance,  or  they  would  never  have  made  Athingans  of  the  Gipfies,  with 
whom  the  moft  unclean  things  are  efteemed  clean. 

(2)  Marius  Niger,  bey  Abrah.  Orteliiis,  in  Thefauro  Geograph.    fub  Artie  Africa. , 
Carol.    Stephan.  Lexic.  hijloricitm,    geographicum,  potticum  \.    edit.  Genev,   1662. 
And  Ferrariui  in  Lexic,  Geograph,  artic.  Zeugitana,—~T\\\%  Zeugitana  of  the  an- 
cients, is  the  eaftern  divifion  of  theprefent  kingdom  of  Tunis.  Sha-vj's  Reij'en  ueberfctzt 
nach  der  2ten  Engl.  Aufgabe.  Seit  67. 

(3)  Spondanui  in  AuBario   chronolog.   ad  Epitomen  Annal.   Baronii^   ad    ann. 
:4l8. 

(4)  Mneai  Sylvius,  bey  Gefner  in  Mithridat.  pag.  81.     Zochori  et  Hcniochi, 
inontana  et  importuofa  colunt  loca,  qus  Caucaii  partes  funf.     His  vita  ex  maritimii 

latrocLniis 


/ 


^14  NoUs   to  the  Third  Chapter. 

Litrociuii;  fuit.  Hanc  Zochororum  terrain  cum  efle  arbitramur,  ex  qua  populi 
exieriut,  qui  noftra  xtate  cum  liberis  et  uxoribus  Europain  pervagantur,  Zhigari 
appellati.  His  opinion  is  founded  not  on  the  name  only,  but  alfo  on  the  thievifli 
jnanner  of  life  which  the  Giplies  lead.  But  that  proves  nothing.  Math.  Marthiius, 
in  his  Lexic.  ph'dolo^ico,  fub  voce  Zigeuniy  adopts  this  origin  as  well  as  yEnea: 
Syl'vim. 

(5)  Ziehen,  Zigier,  Sikcher,  or  Zincher,  among  the  ancients,  which  in  the 
earlieil  times  were  called  Achseans,  dwelt  in  the  country  now  inhabited  by  the  Cir- 
■caffians.  The  authors  who  derive  the  Gipfies  from  them  are,  Otrococfius  in  Origi- 
nib.  Hufigar.  Parti,  pag.  171.  And  Joann,  Ge.  Eccard,  in  Diflert.  de  ufu  Jiudii 
ctymologici   i/t   Hijioria,    C.    I. 

(6)  WetmcrOhfer'vationesPraBka,  fub  voce  2;[fc//«fr. 

(7)  Claude  Duret  Threfor  dc  VHiJloirc  da  Langnes  de  cet  Uni'verl,  pag.  312. 

(8)  Martin  Delrio  Difijnijitiomim  Magicar.  T.  II.  pag.  587. 

(9)  Herbelot  Biblioth.  Orient,  unter  dem  worte  Zeng. 

(10)  Bellonius  Obfervationum,   Lib.  II.  cap.  41. 

(11)  Francifc.  Fcrdin.  dc  Cordova  DidaJ'cal.  muliipl.  pag.  4121. 

(12)  Mart.  Kclpiusm  Hatalihis  SaxonumlranJJilvania,  cap.  II.  §  14.  not.  c— 
■Obfervo    ipfos    (Zingaros)    vernacula    fe   appellare    Morre  :    auditur   etiam    inter 

blatterones  Amori,  unde  erudlto  culdam  Amorrita  viii. 

(13)  Mahometan  Monks,  who  under  the  pretence  of  holinefs,  are  guilty  of  the 
jnoft  flagrant  excefles.  Bajazet  the  Second  baniflied  them  the  Turkifli  empire  in 
1494;  and  thefe  expatriated  Torlaques  are  converted  into  Gipfies.  It  rather 
makes  againft  this  fyftem,  that  Gipfies  exifted,  before  Bajazet  the  Second  was  born, 
or  baniihed  any  Torlaques.  Leonda'viKs  PandeB.  Turc,  nr.  171.  Camerar.  Hor. 
fuhcejk/te,  Centur  II.  c.  75.  p.  300. 

( 1 4)  The  Faquirs  in  Mahometan,  the  Kalendars  in  Heathen,  and  the  Gipfies  in 
Chriftian  countries,  refemble  each  other  exaftly,  and  are  indubitably  the  fame  race. 
Salmon  Gcgenvjdrtiger  Staat  vou  Peifaii,  Kap.  9.  Seit  247.  Faquirs  and  Kalendars 
are  alfo  Monks,  and  wander  about  in  Mahometan  and  Heathen  countries,  like  the 
moft  atrocious  robbers  and  villains.  Anquetil  fays  the  Faquirs  in  hidia  go  pil- 
grimages to  Jagrenat,  to  the  amount  of  feveral   thoufands.     On  their  return  from 

_^ugrenat  they  plunder  fuch  villages  and  cities  as  lye  in  their  wa}".     They  form  con- 
fid  erable 


Notes  to  Ike  Third  Chapter,  215 

Mtrable  artnies  about  a  mile  from  Jagienat,  where  they  chufe  themfelvcs  a  leader,  to 
U'hom  they  pay  all  the  honors  due  to  a  General..  AnquetiVs  Rcifcn.,  Seit  no  f. 
Vergl,  Salmon  am  genannten  Orte.  With  regard  to  ftroUing  and  thieving,  the  Fa- 
quirs and  Gij>ries  agree  exactly.  But  this  proves  nothing  concerning  the  cxtra.5tion 
of  the   latter. 

(15)  Anzeig^n  aus  den  Kayferl. K'unigl.  EMiindcrn,  5ter  Jahrg.  Seit  207. 

(16)  yo.7omkaSzafzliyCommcnt.de  diverjis  populis  Hiingar,  §7.  Addo  loco 
ultimo  fmgulare  Zingaroruni  genus,  quod  vel  ex  Tartarorum  Avarorum,  quos 
Carolus  MagTius  feculo  IX.  profligavit,  vel  ex  Paczinaczitarum,  qui  feeulo  XII. 
extinfti  funt,  refiduis  in  Valachia  reliquils  propagatum  eflb  oplnor.  Otrolotfchi 
likewife  believes,  that  the  Gipfies,  as  has  been  hinted  above,  were  thought  to  be 
Ziehen,  exifted  in  Pamionia  during  the  time  of  the  Avari.  But  I  Ihall  give  the 
extraordinary  reafon  on  which  he  grounds  this  aflertion  in  his  own  words  :  Succurrit 
mihi,  he  fays,  annon  ex  hifce  Ciganis  olim  multi,  imo  plures  fuerint  inter  Abares, 
quam  inter  alios  Hunnos  citivis  egreflbs,  qujbus  familiarior  poterat  elTe  vox  ilia 
Chagan,  Abaribus  ufitata,  qui  fuos  Duces  appellarunt  Chaganos  :  quam  noftris. — 
Etfi  mihi  ignota  illorum  lingua ;  tamen,  ut  ex  pronunciatione  illorum  coUigo,  no- 
men  Chagan  facilius  illi  hodie  pronunciabunt,  quam  noftri.  On'giiz,  Hungar,  P.  I. 
p.  1 7 1 .  So  becaufe  the  Gipfies  can  pronounce  the  word  Chagan  with  greater  facility 
than  the  Hungarians,  and  the  Avari  called  their  rulers  Chagans  ;  therefore  they 
muft  have  inhabited  that  country  in  their  time. 

(17)  Alhert  Kraifz.  Sachjifche  C/^oiiii,   iitesBuch,  Kap.  2.  Blatt  239  b.     Cn- 
rtui  Schlejifche   Chronik,   2tcr  Th.    Bl.   37.     Camerar,  lloree  J'tibcefi'vir.,  Centur  I. 
cap.  1 7.  pag.  96.     Be/old  Thefaur.  PraSiic.  voc  Zigeutier,     Moltken  in  den  Atimerhk,  . 
zu  Browne's Relig.  Mt-dici.  pag.  346.  u.  a.   m. 

(18)  Jo.  Bodiniu  de  Rfpubl.  Libr.  V.  cap.  2.  iin. 

(19)  Be/old.  Thefaur.  PraHcc.  pag.  1026.  In  libro  quodam  vetero  Italico,  five 
Itinerario  ad  Jerufalem,  Lib.  V.  hujusmodi  Cingari  dicuntur  effe  pofteri  Cahii, 
vagi  ct  cxtorres  propter  ipfius  peccatum.  His  confutation  is  :  Quod  tamen  abfvirdum, 
cum  omnes  tales  pericrint  in  diluvio  unlverfidi. 

(20)  Polldorus  VirgUiui  de  reriim  Invcntoribns,   Libr.  VII.  cap.  vii  p.  509. 

(21)  Sunt  (Zingani)  autem  Walachi,  ficquc  cos  Germani  appellant,  id  eft, 
Itali,  hue  olim  ad  repcllendos  barbararum  gentium  tumultus  ex  Italia  in  colonias 

miffi. 


ai6  Notes  to  the  Third  Chapter. 

niilli,  ubi  patiium  habitum  per  multos  armos  ad  hunc  ufque  diem  in  parte  retlnuenntt. 
Brodans  Mi/cell.  VIII.    17. 

(22)  Peru  lihror,  jiivenil.  Loculament.  II.  Libr.  II.  cap.  2.  pag.  163,  feqq. 

(23)  The  caufe  of  this  was  a  dreadful  plague  which,  in  the  year  1348,  raged  all 
over  Europe.  This  was  attributed  to  the  Jews,  who  were  accufed  of  having  poi- 
foned  the  wells  and  water-fprings,  in  order  to  exterminate  all  the  Chriftians  in 
Europe.  Never  did  any  &t  of  people  experience  greater  opprellion  and  mifery  than 
what  was  undergone  by  the  Jews  of  that  time.  All  the  goals  and  prifons  were 
full  of  theni  ;  they  were  put  to  the  rack  in  every  judicial  court.  The  day  was 
hardly  long  enough  for  the  execution  of  the  poor  condemned  wretches,  nor  the 
nights  ever  dark  on  account  of  the  continual  fires,  which  were  kept  burning  every 
where,  to  confume  them  at  the  flake.  Vail  numbers  who  efcaped  the  rigor  of  the 
tribunals,  fell  a  facrifice  to  popular  fury.  They  were  fufFocated  in  bogs,  flaugh- 
tered  like  flies,  or  dellroyed  by  fome  means  or  other.  There  was  no  difference 
made  of  age  or  fex.  The  fame  unrelenting  fate  purfued-men  and  women,  children 
and  grey-headed,  without  exception.  To  all  this  was  added  the  plague,  which  at- 
tacked the  Jews  as  well  as  the  Chriftians.  Under  fuch  circumftances  it  is  no  won- 
der if  fuch  as  could  efcape  from  a  perfecution  fo  unmerited,  really  did  fo,  and  fe- 
creted  themfelves  in  the  mod  retired  corners.  Hoiberg  (Judifche  Gefchichte  am  an- 
gef.  O.)  therefore  does  not  gain  any  thing,  when  he  objefts  to  Wagenfeil's  opinion, 
that  although  David  Ganz  minutely  defciibes  the  incidents  attending  the  perfecutions 
of  the  Jews,  he  does  not  mention  their  flight  into  forefts  and  defarts. 

(24)  Hoc  equidem  Juvenis  etiam  mirabar,  non  pofle  nos  fcire  primordia  rei  non 
admodum  a  noftro  feculo  remotae,  et  e  quibus  terris  novi  in  Germania  hofpites  pri- 
mum  prodlerint.  Cum  multum  diuque  cogitatione  in  omnes  partes  me  verfaflem, 
tandem  in  primorum  Zigeunorum  vera  cubilia  incidilTe,  me,  Tion  tarn  fpero,  qiiam  con- 
fide ;   ac  'pro   inde   07nuino  pro  certo  hoc  dico,  edico,  primus  Zigeunos  Judtsos  fuijfe  : 

cui  aiTerto  ut  fidem  conciliem,  fie  in  apricum  deduco  omnem  feriem  rerum.     IVagen- 
/eil,  1.  c.  pag.  165. 

(25)  Job.  Michael  MnfcheroJ'cb,    oder    Philander    fon   Sittewald,    Salyrifcben 
fGcJichten, 

^(^6)     See  firft  SciSlion  ofthisTreatife,  Chap.  XII.  pag.  61,  &g. 

(27)     E.O. 


Kdtfs  to  the  Third  Chapter,  z  i  j 

(••})  E.  n.  when  he  111 ys,  they  came  out  of  their  holes  and  coiners,  asfoon;i3 
they  perceived,  the  Jcnvs  had  no  longer  reafon  to  be  apprehenjive,  and  yet,  immcdi-- 
atciv  aflerts,  they  did  not  profefs  to  be  Jews,  but,  in  order  not  to  pofitivcly  deny. 
the  IVIofaical  doctrine,  would  not  abfolutely  give  themiclves  out  for  Chriftiuns,  they 
therefore  adopted  an  undefined  middle  plan,  viz.  faid  they-  were  Egyptian  pilgrims. 
What  occafion  was  there  to  conceal  their  being  Jews,  as  the  publication  of  it  would 
not  beat  all  dangerous  ? — But  moreover  it  is  falfe,  that  they  never  declared  what  re-  • 
ligion  they  were  of,  and  that  they  were  Chriftians.  The  very  pretence  they  ufed 
for  their  em'gration  from  Egvpt  was  a  clear  confellion  of  Chriftianity. 

(28)  The  IMonguls  have  nothing  but  their  fliephefd's  life  in  common  with  the- 
Tartars,  and  a  very  faint  affinity  between  their  languages.  On  the  contrary, 
i)  With  refpeift  to  their  cuftoms.  2)  In  regard  to  their  political  regulations. 
3)  Moft  of  all  in  their  turn  of  countenance,  they  differ  from  all  the  genuine  hords  oF 
Tartars,  about  in-  the  fame  degree  as  the  Negroes  in  Africa  from  the  Moors.  There 
is  not  a  fliadow  of  tradition  remaining  to  prove  that  they  ever  belonged  to  the  fame 
nation  with  the  Tartars.  V.  Pallas  Sammlungen  Hiftorifcher  Nachrichtcn  iiber  die 
Mongolifchen  Volkerfchaften,  iiterTh.  Seit  2.  Gcorgi's Befchreibung  alter  Natioiien 
des  Rujpfi:hen  Reichi,  Seit  86.  9 1 . 

(29)  Anzeigenain  denKayferl.  K'onigl  ErUaitdcrn,    ;ter  Jahrg.  S.  204,   206. 

(30)  Pray  Annal,  Regiim  Hungar.  P.  IV.  Libr.  iv,  p.  273.  Ipfi  enim  fe  lin- 
gua vernacula  Romx  (I  do  not  find  this  in  any  other  author)  appellant-  hujus  no- 
minis  provincia  ad  Huvium  Akaram,  intra  ambitum  Galatiae,  Amafine,  Paphlagonice, 
ac  Ponti,  quinquaginta  circiter  milliaribus  a  Byzantio  remota  olim  fuit.  Gens  qux 
earn  provinciam  coluit,  paflim  aufl:oribus  Ciancari  et  Cigiani  dicuntur.  Si  quid  igi- 
tur  fimilitudo  nominis  valet,  inde  ortos  fufpicor.  Poftea  autem,  quam  Tamerlanes 
occupata  Afia  rainore,  Bajacetem  cepit,  credibile  eft,  gentem  in  varia  loca  fparfam 
fuille  poft  annum  Chrifti  1403,  atque  in  Europam  etiam  venifle.  Certe  primuni 
omnium  in  Moldavia,  Valachia,  ac  Hungaria  circiter  annum  141 7,  vifi  funt,  etc. 

(31)  yo.  Ge.  Eccard DiJ/irt,  de  Uj'u  Studii  Etymologiciin  Hijl.  c.  i. 

(32)  V.  Kantemir  Gefchichte  dei  Ofmanifchen  Reichs.  Seit  187  f.  Staat  'von  Ca- 
fan^  Aftracan,    tend  Ccorgien,    (Nurnb.   1724-8)     Seit    132,    133.     Salmon  Gegen' 

ii:dr'iger  Staat  von  Arabieii,  der  grofzen  Tartary,    utid  den  angrenzenden  Liindern, 
Seit  146,   147. 

Ff  (33)     ^^ 


2i8  Notes  to  the  Fourth  Chapter, 

(33)     Ex  omnibus  autem  hifce  audafter  concludo,  Cingaroi-um  five  ZigenoruK 
nomen  a  Zygis,  vel  Zingis  populis  qui  flint  laudati  Tartari  Circaffi,  deduftum  fuifl'e, 

ft  qui  ante  7He  aliunde  dcrivarlnti  oinncs  et  Jinguloi  errai'ijfe,     Eccard,  I.e. 


NOTES    to    the   Fourth    Chapter. 

(0  Thomajius  Differt.dcCingaris,  §29.  Nunc  c  patriis  fedibus  Cingaros  eru- 
amus.  Primos  illos  fcilicit.  Nam  hodierni  omnium  teirarum  funt  indigens. 
Cfr.  .§  44. 

(2)  §  59,  60.  Refponderi  poteft.  ut  quantulacunque  Clngaronim  hujus  xvl 
partlcula  e  leliquis  exulum  iftoium  fuperfit,  tamen  procul  dublo  ceteiam  partem  efle 
coUuviem  otioforum  hominum,  ex  variis  nationibiis  coUedtam,  a  primis  Cingaris 
longe  longeque  diverfam,  &c. 

{-()  §  29.  Ipfi  fe  nunquam  alios  voluerunt,  quam  jEgyptios  primo  ortu  cen- 
feri,  patriam  fibi  aflerentes  ^gyptum  minorem. — Jam  fi  tam  probi  fuerunt  Initio,  ut 
th.  praeced.  oftendimus,  fidem  aliquammereantur. 

(4)  1.  c.  Sed  utut  hnec  fe  habeant,  putamus  tamen  tantum  confici  pofle,  unde 
conllet,  eos  temporibus  piimis,  uhi  exploratiora  citra  duhiion  omnia  fuerunt,  feiio  pro 
jEgyptils  habitos.  In  confirmation  of  this  he  appeals  to  the  name  Egyptians,  which 
they  bore  at  firft  all  over  Europe.  For  in  Sigifmund's  paffports,  mentioned  by 
Mitnjier,  they  are  alfo  called  Egyptians.  And  lalKy  in  three  epitaphs,  cited  by 
Crujius,  written  for  three  Gipfey  chiefs,  Egypt,  and  particularly  the  Le£ir  Egypt  is 
mentioned.     §  30,  31. 

(5)  §  32.  —  Ut  caufTa  nobis  non  fit  temere  a  perfuafione  tertii  abhinc  fcculi  re- 
cedendi. 

(6)  Andreas  Prejlytcr  Jiatijlonenjis  in  Chron.  Bandar,  p.  122.  Eodem  anno 
(1433)  ■^■enerunt  ad  terram  noftram  quidam  de  populo  Ciganorum,  qui  dicebant  fe 
effe  de  jEgypto.      SehajL  Mioijier  Cofmogr.   Buch  4.   S.  371.      They  alfo  give  out — 

vthat  they  firll  came  from  the  Lefler  Egypt. — Kran%,  But  they  thanfelvei  fay,,  Sec, 
■£tumpf.  They  tell  people  that  they  came  from  Egypt.  Guler.  Their  oivn  account 
'.ivas  that   their  anceltors  dwelt  in  Lefler  Egypt,  &c.     Wurftifcn.     T\\ey  pretended 

that 


\ 


No!ei  to  the  Fqurtb  Chapter-  219 

that  they  were  dcfcended  from  the  Egyptians.     Sec  alio  Muratori  Annali  iVItalia, 
and  Scriptor.  rcr.  Ital.  in  the  bciore  recited  places. 

(7)  Aventin,  above  quoted,  They  gave  out  that  they  came  fiom  Egypt,  and  "m- 
mediately  adds,  They  are  a  fet  of  rafcah,  an  herd  of  fcoundrels  colkclcJ  from  the 
bar  den  of  Hungary  and  Turkey. 

(8)  Kranz,  quoted  above.  But  the  c  (their  pretences  that  they  were  Egyp- 
tians) are  fables.  For  they  are  a  fort  of  people,  born  in  a  wandering  ftatc,  ac- 
knowledging no  mother  country;  which  has  been  certainly  proved. — M'utijicr :  It 
has  been  ivell  authenticated  that  thefe  miferable  wretches  are  boin  Ihollers,  not  hav- 
ing any  mother  country,  &c. 

(9)  -(Egyptios  eos  vocamus,  quod  ex  minori  jEgypto,  (quce  ubiterrarum  fit,  me 
nefclre  fateor ;  jEgyptus  nemini  non  notaeft;  led  earn  in  majorcm,  et  minorem  &• 
ftinftam  efle,  a  neinine  fido  auiSlore  haftenus  intellexi)  extorres  fe  efle  dicunt.  Or- 
telius  in  Thefauro  Geographic,  fub  Zci/gitana,  Likewife  Delrio  Difquijitionum  Ma- 
jicarteiii,  Libr.  I.  Cap.  5.  pag.  207.  Guler  Befchreibung  der  Grauen  Biindten, 
Bl.   156  b.  und.  a.  m. 

(10)  Buonavcntura  Vulkanius  belongs  to  that  clafs  of  authors  who  admit  the 
Egyptian  defcent  of  the  Gipfies  ;  and  may  in  fome  meafure  be  reckoned  the  firft  of 
them  who  has  attempted  to  corroborate  his  opinion  bv  evidence.  Jofeph  Scaliger 
furnillied  him  with  a  lift  of  Nubian  words,  among  which  there  were  found  three  : 
Dade,  Father ;  Mauron,  Bread ;  Yag,  Fire ;  which  are  likewife  Gipfey  words. 
Thence  he  infers  that  Nubia  is  the  Gipfies  mother  country  ;  and  in  order  to  accom- 
modate this  to  their  Lelfer  Egypt,  he  proceeds,  The  French  call  the  Gipfies  Bohe- 
mians, item  jJLgyptios,  quod  Nubiam  ctiam  ipji  Nubiani  minorem  ALgyptum  voccnt. 
He  fpeaks  here  from  the  very  foul  of  the  French,  and  palms  a  rcafon  for  their  ap- 
pellation of  Egyptians  on  them,  which  no  French  author  knows  any  thing  of  j  and 
which  is  evidently  a  mere  arbitrary  furmife  of  his  own,  in  favor  of  his  opinion.  The 
affinity  between  the  Nubian  and  Gipfey  languages  is  but  very  poorly  proved.  Is  it 
by  any  means  a  juft  conclufion,  becaufe  three  words  are  the  fame  in  two  given  lan- 
guages, that  the  two  languages  are  the  fame  ?  By  fuch  kind  of  analogy  the  Arabian 
and  German  would  much  better  bear  a  comparifon,  than  the  Nubian  and  Gipfey  lan- 
g:uages.  Befides,  he  alligns  for  the  rcafon  of  the  Gipfey  emigration,  that  they  were 
driven  out  by  the  Sultan.     His  words  arc  :  Ante  hos  CLX  plus  minus  annos  (he 

F  f  2  wrote 


•220 


Notes  to  the  Fourth  Chapter. 


.v,Tote  la  1597)  a  Sultano  jEgyptii  fedibus  fuis  pulfi  Palsftinam,  Syrkm  ct 
Afiam  Minorcm  mendicorum  fpecie  pervagantes,  trajedo  Hellefponto,  Thraclam, 
ct  circumdanubianas  regiones  incredibile  multitudini  inundarunt.  Viilcanius  de 
ilterii  Gctarum  feu  Gothorum,  p  loi.  Concerning  this  opinion  of  Vulcanius, 
confult  Job.  Liulolfs  Hijl.  JEthiopic  Commentar.  214,  &c.  and  it  will  there  appear 
that  the  whole  does  not  contain  a  word  of  truth. 

(")  §  33 — 37'  Viz.  drefs  and  fortunetelling.  On  account  of  the  latter,  Cafpar 
■Peu%cr  (de  divination,  p.  160)  and  Huart  (fcrutin,  ingen.  c.  15.  p.  424)  are 
very  well  inclined  to  believe  the  Gipfies  are  Egyptians. 

(12)  His  reafon  for  believing  it  is,  becaufe  Vulcanius  afferts  it.  Malumus 
tamen,  he  fays,  credere  Vulcanio  affirmant!,  qui  depromto  Catalogo  vocum  qua- 
rundani  Nubianarum,  non  imperituin  fe  ejus  lingus  oftendit,  §  37.  But  what 
flight  grounds  Vulcanius  went  upon,  is  already  fet  forth  in  the  foregoing  note. 

(13)  L.  c.  §  9.  Ihomafius  on  this  occafion  alfo  has  made  fome  converts, 
Chriftian  Daum,  in  order  to  prove  that  Zigeuncr  is  produced  from  ^gyptianer, 
adduces  (in  einem  Briefe  an  L.  Joach.  Feller  bey  Eccard  am  ged.  Orte)  a  long 
catalogue  of  fuch  names  as  in  the  German  language  are  fhortened,  fometimes  by 
cutting  off  part,  or  reducing  two  fyllables  into  one,  when  compounded  of  two 
liquids  and  a  mute.  e.  g.  Hans  for  Jolmiines  ;  Greta  for  Margaretha ;  Bafilan, 
Sehajlian ;  Afmus,  Erafinus ;  Lena,  Magdakna ;  &c.  whereas,  on  the  contrary, 
the  vulgar  fay  Cl.TiJligan  or  Chrijiikan  for  Chriftian, 

(14)  V.  Tiirklfcher  Schauplatz,.  Num.  2.  b. 

(15)  Above  he  is  quoted  as  the  perfon  who  broached  the  opinion,  that 
they  were  the  fame  as  Faquirs  and  Kakndars.  He  feems  therefore  nothing  lefs 
than  decided  in  his  opinion,  when  he  appears  again  now  as  the  defender  of  their 
Egyptian  defcent. 

(16)  Salmon  heutigc  Hiji.  odcr  gegcnivilrtiger,  Staat  des  Turkifchcn  Rcichs, 
Th.   I.  Seit   319,  320. 

(17)  Sultan  Sellm  hah  drawn  out  his  troops  againft  Ferfia,  with  the  determination, 
if  not  to  conquer  the  country  entirely,  at  leaft  to  do  them  all  the  mifchief  he  could  ; 
for  which  reafon  his  tremendous  army  was  already,  in  1517,  encamped  near  Aleppo. 
Gawri,  the  ClrcalTian  Sultan  in  P^gypt,  when  he  heard  of  this  enterprife,  being 
fearful,  that  after  Sellm  had  actompliflied  his  intentions  refpeCting  Perfia,  he  might 

attack 


Notes  to  the  Fourlh  Chapter.  22 f 

attack  him,  fent  ambafliidors,  to  offer  his  alTiftance  againft  the  Perfums.  Sclim 
accepted  it,  and  Gawri  immediately  colletted  his  foiccs.  As  the  two  armies  lay 
near  each  other,  it  fo  happened  that  feme  Circaffians  attacked,  and  plundered,  feme 
loaded  camels,  which  were  going  to  Selim's  camp,  Sclim,  who  looked  upon  this 
as  an  aiffront,  inftantly  refolved  to  leave  the  Perfians  quiet  for  the  prefent,  and 
to  draw  his  fword  againft  his  ally.  This  he  accordingly  did,  and  Gawri,  being 
betrayed  by  two  of  his  generals,  was  defeated,  and  fell  in  the  adion.  Thofe  who 
efcaped  from  the  battle  fled  to  Kahire,  where  they  related  what  had  pafled,  and  a 
general  aflembly  being  convened,  they  immediately  proceeded  to  the  elcclion  of  a 
new  king,  Tumanbcy.  He  marched  to  attack  Selim  once  more,  was  defeated, 
and  having  experienced  various  reverfes  of  fortune,  at  laft  fell  into  his  hands. 
Selim  was  fo  charmed  with  his  underftanding,  that  he  not  only  granted  him  his 
freedom,  but  intended  to  appoint  him  Viceroy  over  Egypt.  However,  before  this 
event  took  place,  people  began  to  talk  freely  concerning  their  hopes,  that  when 
Selim  fliould  have  withdrawn,  Tumanbey,  with  the  remaining  Circaflians  and 
Arabians,  might  be  able  to  drive  his  troops  out  of  Egypt,  and  reinftate  the 
Circaflians  in  their  former  dominion.  Thefe  reports  came  to  Selim's  knowledge, 
yet  his  confidence  was  fo  great,  that  he  at  firft  did  not  entertain  any  fufpicion  of 
Tumanbey.  But  at  laft,  when  they  continued,  and  even  increafed,  he  ordered  the 
unhappy  man  to  be  arrefted,  and  hanged  under  one  of  the  gates  of  Kahire.  On 
which  occafion,  like  a  true  Barbarian,  he  made  ufe  of  the  following  words  : 
''  How  great  my  favor  was  towards  him,  I  have  fuihciently  proved ;  the  effefts 
'*  of  his  partifans  converfation,  let  the  wretch  himfelf  experience."  With  him, 
not  onlv  ended  the  government  of  the  Circaflians,  in  Egypt,  after  it  had  continued 
286  years,  but,  by  command  of  Selim,  they  were  for  feveral  days  left  to  the 
mercy  of  their  conquerors,  who  treated  them  with  the  greateft  cruelty.  V.  Kan- 
ttmir  Gefchicbte  des   Ofmanifchen  Reichs.     Seit   233,  ft". 

(18.)  Twifs  alfo  is  of  this  opinion,  but  gives  no  reafon  for  it,  he  fays  of  the 
Spanifii  Gipfies  :  Leur  race  eft  un  melange  d'Egyptiens  &  d'Ethiopiens.  Voyage  ea 
Portugal  £5*  en  Efpagne.    Traduit  de  I'Anglois,  Chap.  27.  pag.  205. 

(19)  Homines  jEgyptii  plerique  fubfufculi  funt,  et  atrati,  magifque  moeftiores, 
gracilenti  ct  iracundi,  ad  fingulos  niotus  excandefcentes,  Libr.  XXH.  fub  fin. 

(30)     Mdamprfh,    Libr,   X. 

(ii)     Schmidt 


;i22,  Notes  to  the  Fourth  Chapter, 

(21)  Schmittt  de  cepis  et  aliis  apud  jEgyptios. 

(22)  Aclian.  I'ariar.  hijloriar.  Libr.  VII.  jEgyptios  aiunt  patientiflime  ferrs 
toimcnta,  et  citius  mori  homincm  jEgyptium  in  qureftionibus  tortura  examina 
tumque. 

(23)  Rccherches  philofophiques  fur  les  Kgyptiens,  et  les  Chinois,    T.I.  feft.  IX. 

P-    313- 

(24)  Grifdbii  always  miftakes  Troglodytes  for  a  particular  national  appellation, 

which  is   juft  as  if  any ,  body    fhould  fuppofe    Nomades   to   be  the  nanie  of  a 
people, 

(25)  Mctamorph.     Lib.  XL 

(26)  P.cchercljes  philofophiqua  fur  Ics  Egyplicns,  ct  la  Chinois.  T.  II. 
p.     Ill,    112. 

(27)  Grifclini  Verfiich  einer  Gcfchichte  des  Temcfwarer  Eanats,  von  Selt  199, 
bis    212. 

(28)  Gefchichte   da  Tranfalpinifchen   Dacicns,  2ter.   Band.  Selt  139 — 144. 

(29)  Pafquicr  Rechenhes  dc  la  France.     Liv.    IV.  ch.  19.  p.  361,  f. 

(30)  Thomafms^  I.  c.  §  37,  will,  on  no  account  allow  this  ;  and  argues 
againft  Bodin,  who  in  the  fifth  book  of  his  treatifc  De  Republ.  Cap.  II.  fin. 
was  the  firft  who  made  the  objection.  Alfo  againft  Lauretitius  PalmyrenuSy 
who,  according  to  Cordova,  1.  c.  pag.  408.  affures  us,  that  the  Gipfies  when 
addrefled  by  fomebody  in  the  Egyptian  language,  did  not  underftand  a  word 
of  it,  faying  the  latter  he  reje£i:s  as  an  infignificant  opponent  ;  and  as  for 
the  foiTner  he  was  not  a  competent  judge  by  reafon  of  his  confined  knowledge 
of  the  Egyptian  language  ;  which  he  believes,  becaufe  Grotius  Epift.  1 1;8.  ad 
Gallos,  fays,  that  Bodin  was  no  great  proficient  In  the  Hebrew  language. 
But  fuch  far  fetched  evafions  are  of  no  fervice,  as  the  affair  can  be  certainly 
afcertained  by  indifputable  proofs,  viz.  by  a  minute  lift  of  Gipfey  words  and 
phr.afes.  Moreover,  Joh.  Ljidolf.  Hiji.  j^thiopic.  Commcntar.  pag.  214.  f.  is 
againft  him. 

(31)  I.e.  Memb.  II.  ^gyptios  effe,  ut  vulgo  quldem  perfuafum,  non  ficile 
dixerim,  cum    moribus   ac  linguae   ^gyptlorum   diffimilliml  femper  fuerint. 

(32)  NuUam  regionem  in  univerfo  orbe  immunem  eflc  exlftimo  ab  erronibua 
illis   turmatira   inccdcntibus,   quos   falfo  nomine  jEgyptioi  &  Eohcmos  appellamus  :• 

nanr 


Ni)/cs  to  the  Fourth  Chapter.  22 j 

nam  cum  in  Matcrea  ct  Cairo  cflcmus  atque  fecundum  Nllum,  in  pluribus  Nili 
pagis  inagnas  iftorum  turmas  invenimus,  fub  Palmis  delidentes,  qui  nan  minus 
in  jE?rypto  extcri  habentur,  quam  apitd  nos,  BeUotiim  Ohfervationum,  Lib.  II. 
Cap.  41. 

(33)  An  anonymous  author,  in  den  Anzeigm  aus  den  K.  K.  F.ibleitiJn-K, 
5tcr  Jahrg.  Scit  198.  fays.  They  do  not  belong  to  the  Arabians,  Turks, 
Greeks,   Armenians,    nor   any    other    nation,    which    rcfidc  in  Egypt;     but   are 

-tompofed  of  an  entirely  fcpunitc  body  of  people.  In  Cairo  they  commonly 
raifc  their  huts  and  pitch  their  tents,  in  large,  vacant  fpots,  where  the  Sun 
fliines  hotteft,  and  roaft  themfelves  the  whole  day  through  in  its  beams  exaftly 
as  our  Gipfies  do  by  the  fire. 

(34)  Lud.    Anton.    Miiratori   Annali  d' Italia.     T.  IX.  p.  no. 

(31;)  Their  origin  remains  a  problem,  not  to  be  fitisfadtorily  folved,  and 
I  doubt  whether  the  Gitanos  themfelves  have  any  fecret  tradition,  that  might 
lead  to  a  difcovery  of  what  they  really  were  in  the  beginning,  or  from  what 
jCQuntry  they  came.    Sviinburne's  Travels  through  Spain,  pag.  229. 


NOTES     to     the     Fifth     Chapter. 

(i)  His  intelligence  is  in  latin  as  follows:  Anno  1763,  die  6  Novemb. 
vifitaverat  me  Stephanus  Pap.  Szathmar  Nemethi,  Typographus  Karolienfis, 
habito  ad  invicem  difcurfu,  niihi  rctulit  :  Eft  in  Comitatu  Comaromienli,  in 
villa  Almas,  Paftor  Reformatus,  Stephanus  Vali,  is  eidem  retulit,  dum 
Liigduni  Batavorum  ftudiorum  acadcmicorum  cauffa  fuiffet  conftitutus,  fc 
ufuin  fuiile  familiaritate  trium  juvenum  Malabaricorum,  qui  fempcr  terni 
ibi  folcnt  ftiideix,  nee  nili  aliis  ternis  venientibus  redire  poflunt  ad  fuos. 
Ex  horum  aniicitia  hunc  fru>flum  haufit  Stephanus  Vali,  quod  millc  et  plurii 
vocabula  eorum  lingua:,  cum  fignificatione  eorumdem,  adnotaverat,  obfervanda 
jilura  noftris  Zingaris  elfe  communia.  Ipfis  cnim  Malabaribus  aflierentibus,  in 
■Jnfula  INIalabaria  efl'e  provinciam  vel  diftridum,  qui  tamen  in  mappa  non  con- 
fjMcitur)     qua;    Czigania     vocatur.       D.    Vali     redux   a    Zingaris   Jaurinenfibus 

pcrqu'fiwt 


^2.^  Noles  lo  the  Fifth  Chapter. 

perquifivit  cas  voces  a  Malabarlbus  fibi  dlAnt:is,  quarum  fignlficationes  Jaurl-. 
nenfes  Zinoari  abfque  uUa  difficultate  eidcm  dbierunt ;  iinde  Czinganos  feur 
Cziganos   ex   provincia   Malabaiica,    Czigania,  ortos  coucludi  potcft. 

Velim  autem  fcias,  dulcis  amice,  Stephanum  hunc  Pap.  Nemethi  efle  imun* 
ex  eiuditis  Patrine  noftra;,  qui,  antequam  ad  academias  Belgicas  exiviflet,  fuerat 
civis,  et  export  fenlor  CoUegii  Debrezinenfis,  nee  ita  credulum,  ut  fibi  paffv.s 
t'uiiret  imponi  a  Valio  Paftore  Almaffienfi.  V.  ylnzeiven  am  den  K.  K.  ErL* 
i'atuiern^  6ter  Jahrg.  Seit.  87.  88. 

(2)  After  having  wavered  backwards  and  forwards,  confelTmg  at  laft  that  he 
did  not  know  what  to  make  of  the  Gipfey  language,  or  where  they  are  properly 
at  home,  he  adds,  "  But  one  thing  we  muft  not  let  pafs  unnoticed,  a  piece  of- 
"  information  from  a  learned  friend  and  wellwillier.  The  following  anecdote  well 
"  defervcs  a  place  here,  as  furnifliing  folid  matter  for  inveftigation  and  refledion, 
"  and  probable  ground  for  believing,  that  not  only  the  Gipfey  language  bears^ 
"  a  great  affinity  to  that  of  Malabar,  but  likewife  that  thefc  people  aftually 
"  originate  from  feme  province  in  that  country."  He  then  proceeds  to  hii- 
narrative, 

(3J     Compare    above    First    Section,    Chap.    XII.     p.    bz. 

How  much  the  Gipfey  language  has  altered  by  time,  may  be  feen  in  a 
ftriklng  manner,  from  two  tranflations  of  the  Lord's  prayer,  both  taken  from 
Hungarian  Gipfies,  but  at  different  periods,  and  are  to  be  found  in  the  6ter  Jahrg. 
der  Wiener  Anzeigen,  Seit  95. 

1.     Lord's  prayer,  according  to  the  old  tranflation. 

Dade !  gula  dela  dicha  mengi,  Czacreng  hogodolcden  tavel,  ogoledel  hogoladhcm, 
te  a  felpefz,  trogolo  anao  Czarchode,   ta  vela  mengi  fztre   kedapu,  marc  mandro 
kata  agjefz    igiertifzara    a  more  befzecha,    male  dfame,   andro  vo   lyata,   enkala 
megula,    dela  enchala   zimata.     Sefzkefz  kifztrio  cothein  banilztri,    piityere    ferif-  . 
■/.amanne,  a  kana  andre   vecfi,,  ale  Va  kofz.     Piho. 

2.     The  fame,   according   to  a   more  modern  tranflation. 

INIuro  Dad,  kolim  andro  therofz ;  Ta  weltro  fzentanao ;  Ta  weltro  t'him  ; 
Tia  weltri  olya,  fzarthin  andro  therofz  kethjn  t'he  pre  p'hu  :  fze  kogyefz  damande 
riiandro   agyefz    a  mingi  ;    Ertitza  amare  bezecha,  fzar,   t'hamin  te   ertingifzama 

rebczecha  ; 


■Notes  10  rhc-  Fifth  Chapter.  n^ 

rebe7.ccha  ;     M.\\\   zfa  men  nndic  hczm,  nlcka  men  Ic   dfungalin    maftfiltar,   Ke 
tirino  t'hin,   tiro  hino  baiibo   fzckovari.     Amen.  ^ 

Thefe  two  trandations  difler  fo  widely,  that  one  would  almoft  be  incliued  to 
doubt,   whether  they  were   really  the  fame   language. 

(4)  V.  fupra.  pag.  62,  &c. 

(5)  Benjamin  Shulzii  Grammatica  Hindojlanica,  and  parti :vilarly  Gramrr.alica 
Indoftana  a  mais  'vulgar  que  fe  praBica  jio  Imperio  de  Gram.  Mogol.  Em  Romi 
1778,  compared  with  John  Fergujpjn's  DiHioitary  and  Grammar  of  the  HivdoJIa/: 
Language.     London    I773- 

(6)  As  this  is  already  much  mixed  with  Malabar  words ;  The  Rabcr 
Gipfies  might  underftanJ  many  of  thofe  which  Vali  repeated  to  them.  vid. 
fupra  pag.   132. 

(7)  As  a  proof  of  this,  compare  what  is  faid  above,  pag.  8.  g.  with  the 
following  words.  Les  Indiens  ont  la  taille  bien  faite,  ct  Ton  en  trouvc  trJs 
peu  de  boffus  parmi  eux  ;  leur  cheveux  font  noirs  fans  etre  crepus,  &  leur 
teint  eft  oliv.itre.  Voyage  du  tour  du  Monde.  Traduit  de  V  It  alien  de  GemelU 
Careri,  par  L.  M.  N.     Paris  17 19.  Tom.  III.  p.  238. 

(8)  E.  G.  That  the  Indians  fuffer  their  children  to  run  about  naked,  to 
as  advanced  an  age  as  the  Gipfies  do  ;  that  the  Indian  women,  efpecially  thofe 
of  the  lower  clafs,  are  juft  as  nafty  and  difgufting  as  the  Gipfey  women ; 
finally  alfo  that  the  inclination  to  live  under  tents  is  full  as  prevalent  among 
the  Indians  as  among  the  Gipfies.  Sieh  Jfei/e  nach  Oftindiett  und  China,  von 
Sonnerat.     Erfter  Band.     Seite   26.  37.  65. 

(9)  V.  Supra,   pag.    28. 

(10)  Sonnerat,   am   angi-f.   O.    Scite  65,  71.  72, 

(11)  V.  Supra,   pag.   29,  8l-c. 

(12)  Sonnerat,  Kap.  9.  Seit  89. 

(13)  Sieh  obcn  Seit  29. 

(14)  Obcn  Seit  34. 

(15)  Am  angcf.  O.  Kap.  4.  8611034,35, 

(16)  Sieh  Tab,  IX. 

(17)  Of  the  City  Mottera,   lyijig  25  Cos  diftant  from  Agra. 

G  g  (18) 


226  Nous  to  the  Fifth  Chapter^ 

(i8)  Ph':l!pp  Baldai  JFahrhaftige  ausfuhrliche  Bcfihnihung  der  OJlindifchen 
Kujlen,  Malabar  und  Coromandel.     Aus  dem  Hollandifchen  Uberfetzt.      Seite  513. 

vergl.  531. 

(19)  Baldisus  am  angcf.  O.  Seite  410.  The  inhabitants  of  the  State  Jafna- 
patnam  are  very  well  gifted  by  nature,  have  good  undcrftandings  and  good 
njemories — are  great  talkers,  and  have  their  tongues   well  hung. 

(20)  Thcvenot  wanted  to  travel  from  Buflbra  to  Scindy,  and  to  make  the-, 
paffage  by  fca,  as  no  other  opportunity  oftered.  "  I  enquired,"  he  fays, 
"  if  it  was  fafe,  and  was  informed  that  nobody  would  load  any  goods  on  the 
"  Ship,  being  afraid  of  the  Zinganes,  Indians  bordering  on  Scindy."  He 
proceeds  to  defcribe  them  as  a  very  thievifli  people,  who  plundered  mofi  ot  • 
the  Ships  which  either  arrived  or  failed  from  the  port.  Themtiot'i  Reifen^  teutfch, 
2ter  Th.  Seite  254.  Vergl.  die  Landfchaft  S'anga  auf  der  Hondifchcn  Charte, 
und  die   Sangarien  auf  der  d'' AnguilUfihen. 

(21)  Vergl,  obenSeite5io  .  .  The  Indian  in  like  manner  ufes  his  kurkuma 
on  every  occafion. 


NOTES     to     the     Sixth     Chapter.. 

(i)  Gefetze  der  Gentoos.  Aus  dem  Engl,  von  Rudolph  Erich  Ra<i>e. 
Hamburg  1778.   Seite  100 — 102. 

(2)  Baldaus  am  angef.  Orte.   S-jite  410. 

(3)  Bdnifche   Mijions  Berkhte,  Th.   111.   Seite  178. 

(4).  De  Parruas  zyn  zeer  vreefachtigh  on  vertzaeght  van  gemoet;  maer 
vol  van  allerhand  bedricgereyen :  want  liegen  en  bedriegen  wordt  by  hen 
voor  geene  zonde  gereekent,  uit  oorzake  het  by  hen  dc  maniere  en  gewoonte 
is.     Nieuhofs  Zee  en  Lnntreife  door  nierfcheide  Ge-vjejicn  van  Oejiindien.     pag.  259. 

(5)  The  Indians  abominate  all  kinds  of  ftrong  liquors,  which  caufe  intoxi- 
cation ;  it  is  only  the  loweft  calls  of  peoplQ  who  drink  them  ;  if  by  chance 
thf  others  ever  do  comjnvt  an  irregularity  of  this  kind,  it  is  always  done  with 

great 


I\i0!es  to  I  be  Sixth  Chapter.  227 

great  fccrecy.     Sonnerat  am  angef.  O.  S.  24.     Vcrgl.  Danl/che  Mijfioni  Berichtt, 
Th.  III.  S.  178. 

(6)  Above  page  33. 

(7)  Het  gcmcen  volk  van  Malabacr,  Moukois  of  Poulias,  en  andcrs  ParruaS 
gcnoemt,  is  zeer  verachtclijk.  Hunnc  vrouwen  en  dochters  makcn  gccne  groote 
Zwarigheit,  haer  lijf  voor  geld  aen  allerlei  flagh  van  menfchcn  van  wat  lantaert 
of  Godsdienft  die  zoude  moi;cn  zijn,  ten  befte  te  geven,  zonder  eenige  vrezc 
voor  hare  mannen — De  Parruas  is  een — volk,  wiens  genegenheit  meer  na  dc 
wolluft  als    dienft  helt.     Nieuhof  am   gedacht.  O.   Seite    14.8.  f. 

(8)  Th.   III.  Seite   178. 

(9)  Sonnerat.     Seite  89. 

(10)  Abraham  Rogerius  Open  Deure  tot  het  verborgnenen  HeyJendom  op  de 
Cuft  Chormandel.  Th.  I.  Kap.  2.  Seite  II.  Ddnifche  Miffions  BerUhte,  T.  III. 
Seite    1 79.     Sonnerat.  S.  90. 

(11)  Above  page  12. 

(12)  MiJJiom  Berichte,  am  angefuhrten  Orte.  Vergl.  Rogerius,  1.  c. 
Baldaus,   Seite  410.      Sonnerat,  Kap.  10.    S.  96. 

(13)  For  the  fourth  caft  are  handicraftsmen,  Labourers  and  other  people 
who  follow  mean  employments. 

(14)  Defe  Parreaes  woonen  inde  fleden  by  malcanderen,  op  een  houck 
van  de  Stadt,  ende  op't  platte  Landt  woonen  fy  niet  in  de  Dorpen ;  maer 
een  ftuck  weegs  afghefondert  van't  Dorp  bouen  fy  hare  Huyfen.  Rogerius, 
1.  c.  pag.  10. — This  race  of  people  have  their  own  feparate  habitations  near 
each  city  and  village,  and  dare  not  live  within  them.  Mijjions  Berichte,  Th.  1. 
S.  399.  Th.  III.  S.  178.  Vergl.  auch  Sonnerat,  Seite  90. — The  reafon  of  this 
reparation  is  becaufe  the  other  cafts  would  think  themfelves  defiled  and  un- 
hallowed by  any  intimacy  with  the  Suders.  The  Bramins  carry  this  averfion 
fc  far,  that  Rogerius  (as  above  quoted)  fays  :  Defe  Luyden  en  moghen  in  de 
ftcden  door  dc  ftraten,  daer  dc  Bramins  woonen,  niet  gaen,  ende  op't  platte 
Landt  en  moghen  fe  in  dc  Dorpen  der  Bramines  hare  voeten  niet' 
fetten,  &c. 

^15)  Dit  Gefchlechte  wort  in  het  Coningriick  van  Gufuratte  Theers 
gcnoemt ;     fy  en  fchiinen  mede  noch   Heydens,   noch  Moors  te  zijn,    maer  op 

G  g  2  .    hacr 


22i>  NoU'S  to  the  Sixth  Chapter. 

haer  felven  te  leven  fonder  eenig    Gheloof  ofte   GodfdieulL,  Ahtaham  Rogerlm, 
1.  c.  pag.    n.     So  auch  Sonnerat,   Scite  164, 

(16)  i?()j-fr;w,  am  angef.  O.  Mijions  Berichte,  Th.  I.  Seite  399.  Jlmjuetirs 
Re'ifeu  nach  Oftindien,  ncbft  einer  Befchreihung  iter  bilrgerlichen  und  Religions. 
Gebrauche  dcr  Parfeii.  Ueberietzt  von  Job.  Ce.  runnann,  Frankt.  am  ]\Iayn, 
1776.  Seit   123. 

(17)  Every  one  (of  the  Parias)  prays  to  the  God  who  beft  pleafes  him,  and 
is  always  of  the  fame  opinion  with  the  reft  of  his  friends  or  neighbours  where  he 
lives.  Millions  berichte,  Th.  I.  S.  398,  399.  — The  caufe  of  the  Sudcrs  great 
ignorance  in  religious  matters,  may  be  eafily  accounted  for,  from  the  ftate  of 
oppreffion  in  which  they  live.  So  far  are  they  from  receiving  any  inftnidion  in 
thefe  matters,  that  the  other  three  Cafts  feem  ftrenuoufly  to  wifli  they  fliould 
have  no  religion,  efteeming  them  an  inferior  race  of  beings,  orig'nally  deftined 
to  perdition.  (Millions  berichte,  Th.  I.  S.  iii.)  Should  any  of  them  take 
it  into  their  heads,  of  their  own  accord,  to  endeavor  to  procure  information, 
concerning  the  religion  of  the  other  Indians,  they  fubjeft  themfelves  to  the 
following  penalties,  according  to  the  laws  of  the  Tfchentus.  "  If  a  man  of 
"  the  Sooder  reads  the  Bedis  of  the  Shajler,  or  the  Pooran,  to  a  Brami/t,  a 
"  Chchtere,  or  a  Bke,  then  the  magiftrate  (hall  heat  fome  bitter  oil,  and 
"  pour  it  into  the  aforefaid  Soodcr's  mouth  ;  and  if  a  Sooder  liftens  to  the  Bedis 
"'  of  the  Shajler,  then  the  oil,  heated  as  before,  fliall  be  poured  into  his  ears, 
"  and  arzeez  and  wax  fhall  be  melted  together,  and  the  orifice  of  his  ears  ftiall 

"  be    flopped   therewith. This   ordination   ferves   alfo  for  the  Arzal  tribe," 

Gentoo  Laws,  oftavo,  1777,  261 — 2. 

( 18)  Herod,  lib.  III.  cap.  99.  p.  202.  /  aXoi  Js  tm»  I  jrvT^pi;  m  oi/isvlsf. 

TUT'jov,  vofjioivii  fieri,  y.piuv  Etfffai  wiauv.  5<aA£ov/ai  ds  Ilaaaioi.  VifAoifl"*  ^E  Tciorj-., 
tl  Atyovlai  ypx^ixif  I't  an  »ta|A«  tuv  osVi'-'v,  nv  t!  a^r,;),  »,v  n  ytn?,  tov  (a£>  av- 
!^ox  aKJfEg  01  (/.xK^ioi  01  l^t-iKiwi;  xiEivacri,  ^xfiivoi  aurov,  rriKoi*ivov  rri  viuu),  tx 
■.■<^tx  (T^iiri  onKfi^tipsiBuu  'O  (Jc,  aVapKopi.ti"j;  iii  ^ij  jU.tv  votr/fiv*  Oj  c?;,  k  criy- 
\ivti>sy.i^ivoi,.  oiTioyliziva-vlii  xalfuwp^^fVem.  tji/  it  ymn  k«ix»,  uTciuTUi  oil  tViypfu- 
jMvxi  ftaAira  yvvxtxi;  Taura  707(71  anJpaVi  c:oi£u(ri,  tci/  yap  iri  l;  yxpaj  dzf- 
xofAEvcv  biaxvli;,  xa]wji^iovla.i.  ti  Si  t4.'tb  Aoyoi/  b'  wcAXst'  tiv£;  ftUTiwn  a7rixii£i!v7ai. 

7refnJlatieUt 


VoA'f  to  the  Sixth  Chapter.  X2i^  • 

7ranJ!ur:oi:. 
The  other  Iiid'.arij  who  inhabit  to  the  e:iftward,  are  nomadic,  and  live  on  raw 
f.efh.  They  are  called  I'adcaus.  They  are  laid  to  h.ive  the  following  cuftoin» 
among  them.  When  any  one  falls  fick,  if  a  man,  his  neaiell  mile  relations,  and 
nioft  intimate  friends,  kill  him,  giving  as  a  realbn,  that  his  dilbtder  would  caufe 
bim  to  fall  away,  and  his  fiefli  thereby  be  lefs  palatable.  It  is  in  vain  for  him  to 
<leny  that  he  is  lick,  they  murder  him  without  mercy,  and  feaft  on  his  flefli.  If 
it  be  a  woman,  her  nearell  female  relations,  aft  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  men 
among  themfelves.  They  kill  Inch  as  are  come  to  a  great  age,  and  eat  them,, 
but  this  fcldom  happens,  as  they  never  fail  to  kill  thofe  that  fall  fick. 

(ig)  Timur  dont  le  deffeln  etoit  de  participer  au  mcrite  ct  a  l.i  gloirc  dc  la 
Gazic,  et  qui  n'avoit  leve  fa  nombreufe  Armee,  qu'en  ii\tention  de  fairc  la  guerre 
aux  ennemis  de  fa  religion,  fe  rcfolut  ailement  a  rentrcprilc  de  la  Conquete  des 
Indes.  Hijioire  de  Timur  Bee.  Ecrite  en  Per/an  far  CherefeJdin  AU.,  Traduite  tn 
Francois.,  par    "Mr,  Pctis  de  la  Croix,    Tom.  III.  pag.  9. 

(20)     This  circumftance  occurred,  particularly  at  the  taking  of  Baunir  (Hijioire 
dc  Timur   Bee,  Tom.    III.   Chap.    14.)    and    in    the   neighbourhood    of    Dehli, 
where  Timur's    mgft  important    battle  was   to   be  fought,  as    he  there   met   the 
chief  army  of  the   Sultan  of  India.     The   hiftorian   relates   the   caufe,    and   the 
number    of  Indian  flaves,  which  were  maflacred   by   Timur's  command,  in  the 
following  words :    L'Emir  Gellan  Chah,    et  les  autres   Generaux,   reinontrerent 
a   Timur,  que  depuis  fon  paflage  de  I'lndus  jufqu'alors,    on  avok  fait  plus  de 
cent   mille  Efclaves  Indiens,  qui  la  pliipart  etoient  Guebres  et  Idolatres  ;  qu'ils 
ttoient   dans   le    camp,    et   qu'on   devoit    s'attendre    que    dans    la    temps   d'une 
bataille  opiniatree,  ils  leveroient  le  mal'que,  fe  jetteroient  fur  nos  Soldats,  pren- 
droient  le  parti  de   ceux  de   Deli,    tacheroient  de  fe    joindre  a  eux,    ct  faifant 
balancer   la  victoire   la    plus   affuree,    nous  feroient   perdre    la    bataille.      Cette 
remontrance   fut  foutenue  par  ceux  qui  avoient  remarque,    que  quand  les  officiers 
de  Mellou   Can  etoient  fortis  de  Deli  avec  leurs  Elephans  pour  nous  attaqucr, 
les    Efclaves    avoient   fait  voir  fur    leur  vifage  une   joye    extraordinaire :   cette 
affaire  fut  mife  en  deliberation  avec  toutes  fes  circonftr.nces  ;   Timur  aprl-s  y  avoir 
fait  ime  fericufe    reflexion,    expedia    un   ordre,  portant  que  ceux  qui  auroient 

de9 


5,30  l<>okS  to  the  Sixth  Chapter. 

■des  Efclaves  Indiens,  euflent  a  les  mettre  a  tnort,  et  que  quiconque  diflfererolt, 
ou  mepriferoit  cet  ordre,  feroit  mis  a  mort  lui  meme.  AulTitot  apr^s  la 
publication  de  cet  ordre,  on  fe  mit  en  devoir  de  I'executer  ;  et  Ton  fit  mourir 
en  moins  d'une  heure  le  nombre  de  cent  mille  Indiens,  fulvant  la  moindrc 
fupputation  qui  en  fut  faite.     Idem  Cap.   XVIII.  pag.   89,   90. 

(21)  The  inveteracy  of  the  lovveft  clafs  againft  the  higher  is  fo  great  that, 
e.  g.  no  Bramin  dare  flievv  himfelf  in  thofe  places  where  the  Soodcrs  have  their 
huts,  as  he  would  run  the  rifle  of  being  buried,  with  a  Ihower  of  ftones. 
J)aiurche  MiiTions  berlchte,  Th.  I.   Seit  711. 


r      I      N      I     «. 


(       23»        ) 


SUPPLEMENT. 


JL  HE  Author  reckons  the  Jews  a  proof  of"  his  affertions, 
concerning  the  Gipfies;  who,  although  the  written  documents 
of  the  former,  may  render  them  tenacious  in  matters  of  religion, 
yet  as  they  are  equally  rigid  in  other  refpeds,  he  fuppofes  that 
fteadinefs  to  proceed  from  their  Oriental  extradion. 

The  Turks  are  here  introduced,  as  a  further  proof  of  the 
unwillingnefs,  fliewn  by  Oriental  people,  to  change  their 
manners.  ( i )  .  j 

The  miferable  flate  of  thefe  people  (the  Gipfies)  may  be 
collefted  from  the  following  circumflances.  We  have  it  from 
tradition,  that  feveral  people,  particularly  women,  have-  been 
buried  by  their  own  defire,  in  order  to  put  an  end  to  their  wretched 
lives ;  and  a  later  account  informs  us,  that  a  Gipfey  man,  who 
had  been  taken,  after  being  whipped,  and  fwearing  that  he  would 
not  commit  any  aft  of  revenge,  was  carried  beyond  the  borders, 
and  threatened  to  be  hanged,  fliould  he  return.  A  few  days 
afterwards  he  experienced  the  fame  fate,  in  another  place,  and 
then  again  in  a  third,  upon  which  he  returned  to  the  firft,  and 
defired  his  fentence  fliould  be  put  in  execution,  that  he  might  be 
rdeafed  from  a  world  where  he  had  the  misfortune  to  belons:  to 
f'och  a  fet  of  beings.     They  were  not  always  even  looked  upon  as 

humaa 


^yz  Supplement. 

human  creatures,  for  at  a  hunting  party  at  one  of  the  fmail 
German  courts,  a  mother  and  her  fucking  child,  were  fliot  like 
a  couple  of  wild  beafts. 

As  upon  examination,  the  idea  of  Gipfies  dealing  children, 
feems  not  to  have  much  foundation,  fo  the  accufation  of  having 
eaten  feveral  people,  becomes  very  dubious,  on  a  clofer  inveftiga- 
tion  ;  and  yet  the  fentence  (2)  pronounced  upon  them  fhews,  that 
the  judge  muft  have  been  fully  perfuaded  of  it.  But  how  could 
any  perfon  aft,  if  their  own  confeffion  of  the  crime  was  fahe, 
confequently  the  dreadful  fentence  of  death  was  the  refult  of 
a  judicial  error.  This  fufpicion  is  fupported  by  more  than 
one    circumftance. 

In  the  firft  place,  the  condemnation  itfelf  contains  very  ftrong 
hints,  if  We  confider  the  contents,  with  refpeft  to  the  general 
proceedings,  and  the  grounds  on  which  the  malefaftors  were 
condemned,  with  certain  traits  in  the  Gipfies  charadler,  and 
compare  all  thefe  with  an  event  recorded  in  the  Hungarian  hiftory, 
which  happened  in  the  year  1534-  The  Gipfies  were  fufpefted 
of  traitoroufly  aflifting  John  Zapolya,  wherefore  the  Governor 
of  Leutfchau,  Cfernaho,  fent  out  fome  horfemen  to  arreft  a"  party 
of  them,  near  Iglo :  The  greateft  part  efcaped  by  flight,  they 
only  took  a  few  old  men  and  boys,  who  were  brought  into 
Leutfchau.  Thefe  confefTed  circumftantially,  Cwhich  appears 
highly  improbable,  that  men  fhould  \)'Q  in  fuch  a  manner,  to 
their  own  ruin,)  as  well  before,  as  upon  the  rack,  the  following 
falfities,  that  a  hundred  of  them  had  been  fent  by  Zapolya  fince 
,the  middle  of  Lent,  and  had  agreed  for  a  fum  of  money,  to  fet  fire 
to  the  five  chief  cities,    Kafchau,  Leutfchau,  Bartfcld,  Eperies 

and 


'Supplement  23  ■; 

and  Zebcn ;  that  the  Saturday  before,  fcvcral  of  them  haJ 
privately  entered  Leutfchau,  difguifed  like  Wallachians  and 
fliepherds,  under  the  pretence  of  felling  fkins,  that  they  laid  fire 
in  various  places,  moreover,  'chat  they  had  murdered  feveral  people, 
and  finally,  that  they  had  letters  from  Zapolya  to  thirteen  different: 
cities,  with  orders  to  afford  them  fhelter  and  proteilion  within 
their  diftrids,  as  long  as  they  chofc  to  remain.  In  confequencc 
of  this  confeflion  they  were  impaled,  "  but  whether  juftly  or 
"  not,"  adds  the  Chronicle,  "  that  let  him  anfwer  for  who 
"  condemned  (3)  them."  For  on  being  condu6ted  about  the 
lown,  to  (hew  in  what  places  they  had  laid  the  fire,  they  could 
not  fpecify  them  j  befides,  they  denied  every  thing  when  they  came 
to  execution.  (4)  Except  the  circumftance  of  retracting,  of 
which  nothing  is  mentioned  in  the  fentence  of  death,  the  cafe 
feems  to  be  exaftly  fimilar  between  thofe  and  the  men-eaters  In 
queftion.  Thefe  were  taken  up  on  fufpicion  of  theft,  in  the 
courfe  of  the  examination  fomething  efcaped  them  which  gave 
occahon  to  think  they  had  committed  murder,  and  the  criminals 
being  interrogated  on  this  point,  perhaps  on  account  of  the 
feverity  ufed,  or  it  may  be,  from  an  idea  of  heroifm  (a  very  common 
trait  of  their  charafter)  they  confeiTed  the  fadt,  and  chattered 
away  till  they  had  filled  the  paper  with  circumftances,  without  con- 
fidering  the  confequences.  When  called  upon  to  difcover  where  they 
had  depofited  the  dead  bodies,  they  promifed  to  fhew,  but  on  being 
brought  to  the  fpot  nothing  was  found,  and  they  endeavored  to 
run  off".  Neverthelefs,  having  once  confefled  the  murder,  they  were 
put  on  the  rack.  As  the  bodies  could  not  be  found,  the  judge 
imagined  they   muft    have    eaten    them,    which    though   denied 

H  h  by 


2^4  Si'pplement, 

by  the  poor  miferable  wretches,  it  was  of  no  avail,  and  decided 
their  fate.  The  following  extract  of  a  letter  (5)  from  Hungary, 
gives  further  reafon  to  doubt  of  it.  "  You  will  certainly  have 
"  heard  of  the  men-eaters  in  the  diftricl  of  Hont.     The  matter 

"  is  not  at  all  confirmed.     The of  the  County,  who,  by 

"  an  overhafty  judgement,  had  forty  of  them  executed,  has 
"  been,  on  that  account,  fufpended  by  the  Emperor,  and  a 
"  Councellor,  as  Royal  Commiflary,  will  be  fent  from  Vienna, 
"  to  examine  minutely  into  the  affair.  The  many  people  faid 
"  to  have  been  eaten,  are  reported  to  be  all  forthcoming,  and  the 
"  confeflion  of  thefe  people  is  faid  to  have  been  extorted  by 
"  inhuman  beating  on  very  flight  fufpicion."  (6) 

The  remainder  who  were  imprifoned,  were,  after  the  examina- 
tion of  the  Commiffary,  beaten  as  thieves,  but  not  capitally 
puniQied,  and  it  is  highly  probable,  that  thofe  who  had  been 
executed  before,  only  deferved  their  fate  as  having  committed 
murder,  but  not  at  all  as  men-eaters. 

Swinburne  gives  (7)  a  curious  account  of  their  fhamelefs  in- 
genuity,  to  cheat   the  people,   at  a  fair  at  Mnrfico   Nuovo. 

If  the  Gipfies  attempted  to  cheat  the  Way  vodes  of  their  Tribute, 
thefe,  on  the  contrary,  plagued  them  very  much ;  and  the 
Emprefs  fent  orders  to  reftrain  them  (8) 

The  Turks  are  fo  fully  convinced  of  the  Gipfies  litue  finceriry 
in  religious  matters,  that  although  a  Jew,  by  becoming  a 
Mahometan,  is  freed  from  the  payment  of  the  charadfch,  the 
Gipfies  are  not,  at  lead  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Conftantinople. 
They  are  compelled  to  pay  this  polltax  even  though  their  anceftors, 
for  centuries;  back,  had  been  Mahometans ;    or  though  they  Ihould 

adlually 


S'.'ppkmcnl.  -i^i 

aftually  have  been  a  pilgrimage  (9)  to  Mecca.  Tlie  privilege  of 
wearing  a  white  turban,  is  the  only  advantage,  their  converlion 
gives  them  over  unbelieving  Jews  and  Giplics. 

In  1578  a  law  was  made  in  Poland  to  prohibit  any  perfons  from 
receiving  Giplies  into  their  houfes,  under  pain  of  baniflimcnt.  (10) 

Matthieus  quotes  a  fentence,  of  the  court  of  Utrecht,  againil 
a  Gipfey  who  had  been  apprehended  in  1545,  for  dilobeying  the 
order  for  banifliing  them,  to  the  following  purport :  To  be 
whipped  till  the  blood  came,  have  both  his  noftrils  flit,  his  hair 
cut  off,  his  beard  ftiaved,  and  then  to  be  tranfported  for  life.  (11) 

In  every  place  where  the  Emperor's  orders  for  civilifing  thefe 
people,  were  attempted  to  be  put  in  execution,  it  could  only  be 
elfedled  by  force,  one  man  .was  fo  much  chagrined  at  the  new 
regulations,  that  he  went  to  market,  fold  his  horfe  for  fix  guilders, 
brought  the  money  home  to  his  family,  gave  direftions  how  it 
fhould  be  difpofed  of;  then,  like  Cato,  unwilling  to  furvive 
the  freedom  of  his  countrymen,  he  deftroyed  himfelf. 

One  of  the  Chronicles  mentions,  that  an  hord,  which  carried 
about  paffports,  had  artificers,  among  them,  who  could  write  and 
cut  feals,  according  as  they  had  occafion  for  them.  (12) 

It  is  not  neceffary  to  truft  entirely  to  circumftantial  proof  for 
the  exiftence  of  thefe  fafe  condu6ts,  as  befides  a  later,  but  here 
very  pertinent  order  of  the  former  Great  Hungarian  Count 
Thurzo,  (13)  given  in  the  year  1616,  remarkable  for  its  ferious 
and  humane  contents ;  an  older  one,  given  in  the  earliefl  age  of 
the  Gipfies,  by  the  moft  auguft  Prince,  the  Emperor  Sigifmund, 
(14)  is  ftill  extant.  It  is  written  on  paper,  and  was  brought  by 
thofe    who  were   at    Regenfburg    in    1423.      Andreas   Prefbyter 

H  h  2  copied 


^-.g  Supplement* 

copied  it  into  his  fix  years  Journal,  which  is  in  the  poffefTion 
of  Oefelius.  Sigifmund  feems  to  have  given  the  like  to  feveral 
hords  and  at  earlier  periods,  this  being  dated  in  1423,  and 
the  tribe  who  were  at  Bologna  in  1422,  had  one  of  the  fame 
import. 

Mr.  Marsden  has  collefted,  from  the  Gipfies  here,  as  many 
words  as  he  could  get ;  he  has  alfo  got  by  correfpondence  from 
Conftantinople,  a  coUeftion  of  words  ufed  by  the  Cingaris  there- 
abouts ;  and  thefe  together  with  the  words  given  by  Ludolf 
in  his  Hijioria  jEthioptca,  compared  with  the  Hindoftan  vulgar 
language,  fliew  it  to  be  the  fame  language,  which  is  ufed  by  the- 
Gipfies  and  in  Hindoftan.  Letter  from  Mr.  Dryander  to  Hofrath 
Loder  in  Jena,  dated  22  April,   1785. 

The  Second  Edition  contains  a  third  copy  of  the  Lord's  Prayeri^ 
with  the  literal  tranllation  in  Latin.  (15). 

The  Author  in  his  Second  Edition  does  not  infift  on  the 
word  Polgar,  being  pofitive  evidence  of  the  Gipfies  Oriental 
extradlion,  but  does  not  allow  that  all  the  other  circumftances 
which  tend  to  prove  it,  are  therefore  to  be  difputed..  When 
he  finds  that  Ram  is  a  mode  of  calling  to  one  another 
amono-  the  Indians,  and  that  Rom  or  Rome,  is  the  fame  among 
the  Gipfies,  he  is  rather  inclined  to  believe  this  has  an  affinity 
to  the  Indian  word  Ram,  than  that  it  is  a  proper  name  among 
the  Gipfies,  as  has  hitherto  been  imagined.  From  the  fame 
origin  he  traces  the  particular  liking  the  Gipfies  have  to  red 
cloaths,  above  thofe  of  all  other  colors,  which  he  can  afiign  no 
veafon  for,  till  he  compares  It  with  Indian  manners.  The  Bramin 
performs  all  his  religious  worfliip  in  a  white  drefs,  without  the 

leaft 


Supplement.-  z^f 

leaft  mixnire  oF  any  other  color.  As  foon  as  he  returns  home 
from  thefc  funftior^s,  he  changes  his  white  turban  for  a  red 
one.  The  common  Indians  aHo  prefer  this  color  for  their  little 
round  caps.  When  thefe  laft,  efpccially  on  holidays,  make  a 
double  deep  yellow  ftripe  on  their  foreheads  with  fat,  laffron, 
and  facred  cow-dung.  The  Bramins  make  the  fame  ftripe  with 
red  (i6)  as  a  mark  of  pre-eminence.  Moreover,  the  dellre  of 
the  Gipfies  to  conceal  their  language,  is  a  ftriking  Indian 
trait.  "  C'..ftom,  fays  Pallas,  "  of  the  Indians  round  Aftrakan, 
"  has  rendered  them  to  the  greateft  degree  fufpicious  and  filent- 
"  about  their  language,  infomuch  that  I  never  was  able  to  procure 
*'  a  fmall  vocabulary  from  them."         ;  .  .         ^ 

To  the  circumftances  of  their  fondnefs  for  faffron,  and  their 
unwillingly  marrying  any  perfon  but  what  is  of  their  own  Caft, 
if  we  add,  that  fome  of  thofe  who  arrived  at  Forli,  gave  out  that 
they  came  from  India,  (17)  we  fhall  come  but  little  (liort  of 
pofitive  proof  that  they  are  Indians,  although  the  following 
chapter  will  contain  entirely  new  confirmations  of  it. 

The  attachment  of  thefe  people,  (the  Pariars)  to  their  own 
habits,  is  fo  ftrong,  that  after  a  boy  has  been  purchafed,  (and 
that  may  be  done  for  half  a  guilder)  fed,  cloathed,  and  every 
method  ufed  to  make  him  a  better  man,,  he  generally  runs  back 
to  his  ftinking  huts  (18)  which  is  a  ftriking  parallel  to  the  trials- 
made  In  Hungary  for  the  improvement  of  the  Gipfies. 

Even  among  the  lower  claffes  and  refufe  of  the  Suders,  there 
is  a  quality  of  people  not  unlike  our  Gipfies,  with  refpecl  to 
their  wandering  about  in  particular  hords,  unlcl's  it  ma)'  be 
admitted  that   they  are  Gipfies  who  have  ftraggled  back  again, 

and 


tjgS  Si'ppkifMKt. 

and  having  travelled  together,  may  be  more  attached  to  each 
other,  or  notwithftanding  the  lownefs  of  them  all,  may  be  looked 
upon  as  inferior  beings  by  theSooders,  who  have  conftantly  refided 
in  the  country.  There  are  great  numbers  of  them  in  India,  who 
ivave  buffaloes  of  their  own,  on  v.hich  they  load  their  property, 
and  chufe  to  refide  in  defarts.  An  hord  of  this  kind  is  mentioned 
in  the  Hlftory  of  the  Life  of  Hyder  Ally,  who,  laying  afide  the 
common  Indian  prejudices  about  fuch  unclean  people,  rendered 
them  very  ufeful  to  his  army.  The  Editor  of  this  Hiftory,  a 
J^'rench  officer  in  Hyder  Ally's  fervice,  calls  the  faid  hord  a  kind 
of  Bohemians,  that  is,  Gipfies ;  perhaps,  had  he  known  that 
Gipfies  originate  from  India,  he  might  have  been  able  to 
give  us  fome  more  circumftantial  account  of  this  wandering 
Indian  hord.    (19) 


NOTES 


C   239   > 


NOTES    to    the    SUPPLEMENT. 


( I )  \^_^OUNT  Bonr.eval  foribok  his  mafter  and  his  religion  in  order  to  introduce 
a  more  perfeit  mi!it;i!y  lyftem  among  the  Turks ;  as  did  likewife  two  other  people, 
with  a  vieiv  of  allilUng  him,  Monehevreul  and  Ramfay,  the  latter  of  which, 
made  his  fonune  among  the  Ruirians,  under  the  title  of  Count  Behnain.  The 
people  at  firft  regarded  the  fmall  corps  cntrufted  to  him,  :.nd  trained  to  the  European 
difciplme  only  as  a  matter  of  amufement  for  the  courtiers,  but  when  the  Turks 
difcovered  the  extent  of  the  plan,  by  Bonneval's  defiring  a  larger  detachment,  the 
people  in  power  fet  themfelves  againft  it,  and  the  whole  nation  was  in  a  ferment, 
infomuch  that  a  rebellion  was  apprehended,  and  the  Author  concludes,  "  il  fallut 
cefler  tous  ces  exercices  qui  n'allarmcrent  que  les  Turcs.  V,  Hijloire  de  la  guerre 
<lcs  Rujfti  centre  Ics  Turcs,  par  Mr.  de  Keralio  (a  Paris  1780-8)  Tom.  I, 
p.  3.   f. 

(2)     Scntentia  FiJ'ci   Magijlralii  Co/nitatiis   Hontenjls    contra   Zingaros    1782, 

Deliberatum   ejl ; 

Adftantibus  in  cauflam  adtraClis  primum  fola  furtorum  cum  nofturnis  Lanienae 
Vifzohenfis  et  Rotarii  Almafienfis  Camerae  effratlionibus  commifforum  pra;fum- 
tione  gravatis,  utque  hjec  et  plura  mlnutiora  fed  ct  homicidium  unum  forma 
Obfeffionis  perpetratum,  ingrcdientefque  ad  iftud  Complices  fub  Nris  i.  2.  3.  4.  & 
5  revelantibus  ;  iftis  demum  per  partes  incaptivatis  et  in  focietate  peculiarl 
conventiculo  coalita,  plurium  hujus  et  Barjienjis  Comitatus  fylvarum  obfellioncni 
et  Georgio  quidem  Sarkozy  in  genere  24  homicidia  fub  Nro  8,  aliis  vero  alias 
diverfis  locis,  diftinfti  temporis  et  varis  conditionis  Itinerantium,  numeroque, 
propterea  quod  in  fingulo  crudclitatis  aftu  omnes  prsfentes  non  fucrit,  difformi, 
neces  fub  prxfcriptis  Nris,  et  6.  7.  g.  ufque  41  inclulive,  confitentibus,  atque  in 
coatrita  horum  confeffione  fua  perfevcrantibus  :  tametfi  quidem  hanc  focietatem 
defluentis  jmii\  fejio  S.  Jofrph:   conditam  effe  fub  Nro.  3  aflcratur;    cum  tamcru 

MitbacL, 


^^o  ISIotL'S  to  the  Supplement. 

Michael  S/.inmond  fub  Kro.  24.  a  3bus  aut  4or,  Michael  Sandor  fub  Kro.  15, 
-circiter  a  C.  Fnmcifcus  et  Kafpar  Konefch  fub  Nris  21,  23.  a  5  vel  6.  Michaiil 
Vords,  fub  Nro.  16  ab  8  annis,  femel  foclos  fuille  agnofcant  ;  Georgius  Sarkbzy 
fub  Nro.  8.  homicidium  ad  Szolos  ante  10  annos  peradlum  memoret  ;  Andreas 
Baifza  fub  Nro.  7.  femet  ab  annis  12  latrocinari  aperiat ;  INIaria  Koralyi 
fub  Nro.  27.  tria  in  fylva  Nemefienfi  homicidia  facile  ad  annos  20  cfferat ;  juxta 
prjeadduftum  Michael  Voros  fub  Nro.  16.  pra^fati  Georgii  Sarkozy  jam  antehac 
tota  progcnie  in  inferioribus  partibus  laquco  extinfta,  ipfe  idem  coram  complice 
Francifco  Didy  fub  Nro.  3  femet  a  parvis  furari  gloriatus  fit,  focietatcm  iftam 
■latronis  hujus  Sexagenarii  alioquin  per  omnes  Complices  pro  Antcfignano  primario 
declarati,  xtati  virili  corevam  in  e:dtu  fmgula;  hycmis  recolllgi  ct  conftabiliri 
«onfuetam  potlus,  quam  praiattailo  Fcfto  S.  Jofephi  conflatam,  fortillime  prx- 
fumendum    eflc. 

Quamquam  porro  Latrocinii  hujus  adeo  vcterani,  ct  ea,  quod  hi  Rei  a  funis 
pecorum  provincial  hujus  domeftlcorum,  prout  aftuta  faex  prsfenfit,  exaftius 
quaerendorum  abftinucrint,  et  etiam  Itinerantcs  non  nifi  a  longe  extraneos, 
aut  Hajeros  *  variis  cxtero  quinquoque  fatis  pereuntes,  ad  idus  fuos  rapuerint, 
ita  ut  hinc  unus  Lanio  Perefzlenyjenfis  circa  feftum  exaltata  S.  Crucis  domo 
difcedens  hucdum  defideretur,  et  hujus  etiam  vita  vel  mors  veftium  per  Uxorem 
■ejus,  Judicio  prcefenti,  denunciatarum,  ab  illis  quas  Lanionis  jam  hoc  vere, 
poftquam  Zfigardiani  compllres  prlmi  comprehcnfi  fuiffent,  in  fylvis  Pocfuvad- 
lenfibus  occifi  fuiffe,  Stephanus  Tohbly  fub  N?  6,  Andreas  Borfza  fub  N?  7, 
Georgius  Sarkofzy  fub  N?  8,  et  Carolus  Gafpar  fub  N?  13  referunt,  incerta 
fit,  fraude  tarn  diu  nimiumque  occulti  corpora  delifti  omnia,  quasrenda  non 
fuerint,  quia  nihllominus  re£le  hunc  Lanionem  recentius,  et  paulo  prius  in 
Almas  Domo  Nicola  Didy  hadenus  profugi  tres  ad  fimul  peremtos  elTe  homines 
ex  plurlbus,  fed  fignanter  fub  N?  13,  24,  et  41,  deteftis,  conftiterit,  poftquam 
horum  oculate  infpiciendorum  induftria  complices  diverfi  exhumationem  et  often- 
fionem  cadaverum  promittentes  ad  facicm  locorum  quadruplici  via  addufti  fuiffent, 
jifdem  ibi  nihil,  pr^terquam  elabendi  occalionem  qua;rentibus,  ac  ita,  labore 
iimpliciter  perdito,  reduftls  ;  atque  tam  his,  quam  reliquis  omnibus  ad  quaftionem, 

quo 

*     Sind  in  Krcmnitz  die  Bergleutc  ;     die  dort  dicfen  Nahmcn  tiihren-. 


Notes  to  the  Supplemi'nt,  '  241" 

<juo  caJavern  convcrterint  ?     fad^am,    angularcm    foci    Domus   Nlcolao-Didian;e- 
lapidem,  in  quo  ibi  occifos  confocuerunt,     cLimantc   iiinoccntiiim   fanguinc  adhuc 
madidiim,    horumque  ac  aliorum   per  lylvas   trucuknter  eneilorum   ihiJem  di'.a- 
niationem,  cofturam  et  Barbaricam,  iftis  non  amplius  abominabilem,  fed  t'rcquentato 
iifu  confuctudinariam,   imo  deliciolam  potius  carnis  humane,  quandoquc   ad   fuas 
c-tiam  domos  jiixta  Tub  Nro.   10  el  34.   ex  I'ylvis    allatae   Vorationem,    fpontc  ac 
benevole  agnofcentibus ;     occurrere    quidem    quod    Matthseus    Hluchy    auriutn- 
impedimento,     et    blaefa   multuin    voce  :     Fccmince    autem    RIaritos     aut    Viros. 
concubinarios      fccutae,      fexus     fui      infirmitate     alleviari     viJerenti.ir  ;       cum 
interim     vir      ille      complicis     remotius     a    fe     coiifrontati     vocem     non     adeo 
altam    intellesifle    atque     cidem    dircde     apteque    refpondiffe    in     Figura     fedis, 
hujus    Reviforia;    obfervatus,     pr^terea    in   domo    Didiana   corporum    exhuma- 
(ionem     et     alio    trandationcm    mcntitus    fpe    profugii,    eorumdem    oftenfioncm 
commodis   (ignis   et  etiam    voce    fluis    intelligibili    promiferit,    ac    in    facicm   locL 
eduiSus   verfus    fylvam    Commiffarium,    alMentefque   Incolas    Alinallienfcs  prir  , 
cedens,     abje^?to    e    brachiis    fune    profugium  reipfa  tentaverit,     atqvie  hac  etiam . 
ratione  pro  confitente  reo  habendus  fit ;     uxoribus  autem  nee  vinculum  matrimo- 
iiiale,  eo  minus  concubinis  peccaminofus  et  ipfe  Concubinatus  tribuat  Latrocinii  vel 
iimplicis,  eo  magis  tanti  temporis  totque  homicidiis  maculati,    excufationem,  qurc 
in  hoc  cafu    non  folum   viros  fequebantur,   fed  juxta  fub   fJrla  i;.  5.  30.  et  34.  in 
Domo  Didyana   intra  duas   Falfd  ct  Alfo- Almas  fibi  adeo  juniftas  Poffefliones,   ut,- 
utraque  pro    uno  loco    haberi  poflit,     medio  fpatio    fita  ad   fuperandum  occiden- 
dorum,   qui   metuebatur,    ejulatum    commiflb    fibi    per    viros    ad    lufum  fidium, 
cantu,     faltu,   et  confufo   clamore    cooperatre  funt.       Ideo  has  foeminas    et   prx- 
adduftum  Matthseum  Hluchy,  cum  rcliquis  viris,    omnes  poena  mortis,   ct  quidera. 
viros  cum  exafperationibus,  dignos  dcclarari. 

Quoniam  igitur  Viri  a  focminis,  Duiilores  a  primariis  et  fecundariis  fubalternis, .  •■ 
feniores  a  junioribus,  et  prout  ad  audendum  eo  mode  poenas  fuftinendum  vali- 
diores  a  debilioribus  ad  utrumqvie  fcqueftrandi  fint.  Hinc  Icuata  tcnus  fpecificatas 
Annam  Reuai,  Mariam  Kuralyi,  Mariam  Francifci  Didy  Confortem, 
Catharinam  Szoufyhy,  Helenam  Martini  Geczy  confortem,  Rofam  Parkas, 
Saram  Thomx  Jonas  confortem,  Elifabetham  Balas,  Csciliam  Siirkozy,  Mariam 
Mkhaelis  Sander  confortem,  Sufannam  Francifci  Jonas  confortem,  Mariam  Jonas, 

"  ■  I,i.  Mariam. 


24.2  Notes  to  the  Supplement. 

Mariam  Radios  Kallaianani,   alteram  Mariam  Radics  Polyakianam  Vlduas,  Mariam 
ChriftinamThomae  Iftock  confortem,et  HelenamSzarkaGeorgil  Siirkozy  concubinam, 
adGtadium;  ita  ut  harum  decolationera  Viri  fufpendendi :  Ex  Virisautem  Mlchae- 
lemZfigardjFrancifcum  Didy,  Jonam  Antus,  Jofephum  Geczy  alias  Kaka,  Nicolaum 
Laczy,Martinum  Geczy,  Francifcum  Dobecz,  Carolum  Gafpar,  MatthiumHluchy, . 
Michaelem  Sandor,  Paulum  Didy,  Seniorem  Michaelem  Jonas,  Kafparum  Konefch, 
Michaelem  Zfigmond  et  Samuelem  Belaj,  ad  Laqnaiiii  ;    ita  ut  horum  fufpendlum  • 
Rota  frangendi ;     poftea   Stephanum   Zfigard,    Stephamim  Poroutyi,    Stephanmn 
Tokbly,  Andream  Boifza,    Francifcum  Jonas  et  Michaelem  Jonas    Darafienfem 
ad  crurifragium  a  parte  inferiore  inchoandum  ;    ita  ut  horum  frafturam  quadrifa- 
riandi  contueantur  :    Tandem  Georgium  Sarkozy,   Michaelem  Voros  et  Francifcum 
Konefch,  ad  quadrifariationem  condemnari ;     atque  in  hoc  Reorum  et  pcenarum 
feparatione  ad  majus  exemplum  vindiftae  de  crimine  deteftando  carnium  humanarum 
efu  polluto,  ac    qua  tali  Legibus   Patrii  et   Praxi  criminali,   eo  quod  per   totam 
Regni  hujus    retroacftam   tctatem  cafus   non   fuerit,     ignoto,    fumtae    praemiflbrum 
cxecutionem  (hactamen  et  fententiae  publicatione  quoad  faeminas  fub  Nris  28,  38, 
ct  41  prxgnantcs,    et  fi   quae  plures  compertae  fuerint,   ufque  partum  fufpenfa)  in 
Kemencze,   Bath    et    Czab   juxta    maximas     comitatus    hujus    poffeffiones     rotis, 
quantum  fieri   potucrit,    tertiis   peragendam    ac    prae!ertim  in  praefentis  tempoiis 
-crebra  fylveftrium  prasdonum  fama  quadrantis  unius  in  vicinia  Pontis  Leledienfis, 
alterius  autem    et   utriufque   tjuadrifariai|dorum    Malcfadtorum  capita  retentari   in 
Terrene    Dregelienfi,  exituquc   verfus    Nagy   Orofzy   infamibus  cnhunnis  appen- 
iionem  decerni. 

(3)  Si  bene  judicati  funt  annon?    de  hoc  reddat  rationem  Dominus  Cscr/za/io. 

(4)  V.Carol.  Wagneri  Analefta  Scepufii,  Part  II.  (Vienna   1774.  4)    fub 
anno  MDXXXIV,  p.  173.  174. 

(5)  Von  vornehmer  hand  nach  Gottingen  gefchricben,  und  datirt— den  aoten 
l^ov.   1782. 

(6)  By  a  manufcript   account   from  Tranfilvama   wc    are   affured  there   are 

■four  forts  of  Gipfies    in   that   country.       i)    City  Gipfies,   who    are   the   mod 

-civilifed  of   any,    they    maintain  themfelvcs  by  mufic,  fmith's  work,  felling   old 

■cloaths,   horfedealing,  &:c.     2)   Goldwafliers,  who  are  a  real  advantage  to  a  ftate. 

3)  The  Tent  Gipfies.    4)  The  Egyptian  Gipfies,  thefe  are  more  dirty  and  more 

addided 


'  Notes  to  the  Supplement.  243 

addicted  to  thieving  than  any  of  the  foregoing.     There  are  not  any  of  the  City 
Gipfics  in  Hungary.— Although  thelc  diftinotions  ftiouUi  not  be  proved  from  re.il 
different  quahties  of  thcin,  but  be  only  the  different  degrees  of  their  cultivation  ; 
It  will  not  be  fuperfluous  to  have  hinted  at   them,  as  it  may  ferve  to  refer  to. 
with    refpeft  to  the  beforegoing  and    following  defcriptions. 

(7)  Szviniuifie'i  Travels  in  the  T1V0  Sicilies,  p.  306. 

(8)  V.    The  two  following  orders,   by   which  it  will  appear,  that  it  was  a 
particular  mark  of  favor  to  be  appointed  fuperlntendant  of  the  Gipfics. 

Articulus  direfalis  pro  Fefio  B,  Michaclis  Archa/iveli,  AWiC  Julia,  1558. 
Quia  Czigani  per  Vaivodas  eorum  variis  taxationibus  et  exaftionibus  extraor- 
dinariis,  contra  vetercm  confuetudinem  ipforum  infeflantur  :  fupplicarunt  igitur 
fideles  Regnicolaf,  dignentur  Majcftates  Su2e  facrx,  *  Vaivodis  Cziganorum 
committere,  ne  ultra  vetercm  eorum  proventum  ad  infolitas  exaftiones  compellant, 
fed  contenti  fint  intra  annum  a  fingulis  Cziganorum  taxa  unius  floreni,  nempe 
ad  Feftum  S"  Georgii  denar.   50  ;    ad  Feftum  S"  Mlchal'lis   fnniliter  50. 

Artie,   ditetal,   in    Enyed  Fcria  fexta  proxima  poji  Dominicani  Reminifccre. 

Ann.  1 560. 
Supplicaverant  fuperioribus  Comitiis  iidem  Regnicocol^e  Sacrs  quondamf 
Reginali  M"  et  Serenitati  quoque  Suae  j  pro  Zingaris  feu  C^Iganis,  qui  per 
Vaivodas  eorum  variis  taxationibus,  exaftionibus,  et  captivitatibus  opprimuntur, 
dignarentur  M"'  Suae,  ipfis  Valvodla  Cig..norum  coitimittere,  ne  ultra  folitum 
florenum,  videlicet  fingulum  quolibet  anno  in  duobus  tcrminis  a  fingulo  Cigano, 
tentorium  proprium  habente,  exigere  debeant,  juxta  morem  et  confuetudinem 
ab  antique  obfervatam.  Propterca  flatutum  eft,  ut  quilibet  Ciganus  tentorium 
habens,  pro  Fefto  B.  Georgii  Marty  ris  den.  50,  pro  Fefto  vcro  B.  Martini, 
totidem  ad  locum  fedis  Comitatus,  in  quo  refidentiam  habet,  importare,  ubi 
fcrvitor  Vaivoda;  adeffe,  et  pecunias  hujusmodi  levare  debeat,  nee  amplius  ab 
eis  exigere  valeant.  Si  qui  vero  Ciganorum  hoc  prsftare  negligerent ;  ab  illis, 
ubi  deprehendi  poterunt,  exigant.     Solventes  vero  more  prxmiflb,  ne  moleftent. 

I    i  2  (9)  Anzeigen, 

*     Ifabella  and   her   Son. 

-j-     BccuuJo  the   Queen  Ifabella  was  dcceafed. 

+     John   II.   Son  of   Ifabella. 


-2^4  ^^otcs  io  the  Supplemerit. 

(g)  Hin.  Niebuhi's  Aufsatz  von  den  verfchiedenen  Nationen  des 
Tiirkifchcn    Relchs  ;     im    Deutfch.    Mufeum.    J.   1784.    Self   23. 

(10)  Promtuar.  ftatutor.  Regni  Poloniae,  per  Paul  Scereic,  Part.  I.  p.  55. 
nnd  efpecially  Leges,  ftatuta  et  conftltutiones  Regn.  Polon.  (Varfov.  i732.fc<]q. 
Fol.)   Tom.  II.  p.  608,  691,  972. 

(11)  De   Jure   Gladii,    Cap.  33,  pag.  633. 

(12)  Westphal.    Monumenta  medita  ler.  German.  Tom.  IV.  coUinin.  341. 

(13)  Litterte  Palatini  Hungarim,  ami.  1616.  Comes  Georgius  Thurzo  dc 
Bethlenfalva,  Regni  Hungaris  Palatinus  et  Judex  Cumanorum  &c,  univerfis  er 
fingulis  Pra;latls,  Baronibus,  Comitibus,  Vice-Comitibus,  Capltaneis,  Prrcfeftis, 
Caftellanis,  E^regiis,  Nobilibus  et  Circumfpeftis,  aliisque  fidelibus  Subjeftis 
Sacrae  Caefarese  Regiaeque  Majeftatis,  cujufcunque  flatus,  conditlonis  et  prDccml- 
■nentiae,   pofleffionatis    hominibus,    turn    Ecclefiallicis    quam    Secularibus,   in    hoc 

Regno  Hungaria;  conflitutls  et  exiftentibus,    prxfentes  Noftras  vifuris,   ialutem  et 
officii  Noftri   commendationem,    quibus   vcro  intereft,  favorem. 

Cum  volucres  cosli  fuos  habeant  nidos,  vulpes  foveas,  Uipl  latibula,  Iconcs 
et  urfi  fpeluncas,  ct  quaelibet  animalia  fua  agnofcant  domicilia ;  mifera  vero 
gens ■  Aegyptiaca  (quos  Czingaros  vocamus),  miiera  pro  certo,  quamvis  vulgo 
ignoratur,  an  ob  crudelis  illius  Pharaonis  Tyrannidem,  vel  ita  fotis  depofcentibus, 
vetcri  fuo  infFituto  in  agris  et  pratls  extra  urbes,  fub  tentoriis  faltem  attritis, 
vitam  acerblflimam  ngcre  confueverit,  unaque  fcnes  et  juvcnes,  pueri  et  infantes 
ejufdem  gentis,  imbres,  frigora,  ajftufque  intenfiffimos,  extra  parietes  fufferre 
didicerint,  nullam  habeant  in  terris  hsreditatcm,  non  urbes,  non  arces,  non 
oppida  neque  tefta  optent  regalia,  fed  incertis  femper  fedibus  errans,  ignara 
divitiarum,  atque  Lnfcla  omnis  ambitionis,  in  dies  et  horas  fub  acre  dlo  duntaxat, 
manuum  labore  incudes,  folles,  malleos  ct  forcipcs  verfando,  vidum  et  aniiiilura 
quzritet,  ac  pro  fui  fuftentatione,  et  ncceflaria  vlftus  acquiiitione,  diverfas 
non  folum  Hungaris,  fed  totius  mundi  partes  peragrare,  et  per  mare  per 
terras,  per  faxa,  per  ignes  oberrare,  pauperiemque  fugere  confueverit ; 
.propterea  gentem  hanc  mifericordia  et  omni  favere  dignam  exiftlmantes,  hortamur 
vos  et  requirimus,  ut,  quoties  aliqua  gentis  jEgyptiacs  caterva,  praefertim  vcro 
prsfentium  exhibitoris  Francifci  Waivod^  (non  ultimus  fu»  ftirpis  alumnus) 
rvim  fibi  fubjedtis    et  fub    duiflu  fuo  militautibiis   Czingaris,    una    cum    liberis,, 

familiis, 


Notes  to  the  Supplement.  245 

tamiliis,  tei^toriis,  incudibus,  follibus,  mallcis,  forcipibus,  allirtiuc  rebus  ct  boni? 
fuis,  ad  vcftras  terras,  tenuta,  dominia,  pofleflioncs,  honorcs  ct  Offieiolatus,  aut 
veftri  per  medium  pcrvcnient,  libentcr  eidcm  in  fuburbiis,  campis,  pratis,  et  terris 
veftris  defcendendi,  tentoria  figcndi,  artcm  ipfoiuin  t.ibiikm,  folitamquc  viftus 
rationem  probe  exerccndi,  facultatem  exerccrc,  eofdemque  tarn  in  perfonis,  quam 
rebus  fuis  quibuslibet,  contra  violentos  quofuis,  turbatorcs,  vcxatores,  ct  dam- 
nificatores,  tueri,  protegere  et  defendere  velitis  ac  debeatis.     Sccus  non  fifturi. 

Praefentlbus  perlcdlis  exhibitori  reftitutis,  datum  in  Byche  die  vigefima  Fcbruarii. 
Anno  domini  Millcfimo  Sexcentclimo  Dccimo  iexto. 

Comes   Georgius  Thurzo    (L.  S.) 
Gcorgius   Zavodlzky  Sccretar, 

(14)  Litters  Sigifmundi  ^ro  Zitigaris,  ann.  1423.  Sigifmundus  Dei  gratia 
llomanorum  Rex  Temper  Auguftus,  ac  Hungariae,  Bohemias,  Dalmatix,  Croatii,  &c. 
Rex.  Fidclibus  noftris  univerfis  Nobilibus,  Militibus  Caftellanis,  Officialibus, 
Tributariis,  civitatibus  liberis,  oppidis  et  corum  judicibus  in  Regno  et  fub  Dominio 
noftro  conftitutis  et  exiftentibus  falutem  cum  dileftione.  Fideles  noftri  adierunt  in 
prjefcntiam  perfonaliler  Ladijlaui  Waywoda  Ciganorum  cum  aliis  ad  ipfum 
lyeilantibus,  nobis  humilimas  porrexerunt  fupplicationes,  hue  in  Sepus  in  noftra 
praefentia  fupplicationum  precum  cum  inftantia,  ut  ipfis  gratia  noftra  uberiori 
providere  dignaremur.  Unde  nos,  illorum  fupplicatione  illetfti,  eii'dcm  hanc  li- 
bertatem  duximus  conc?dendam,  Quare  quandocunque  idem  Ladiflaus  Way?;oda 
et  fua  gens  ad  i\Ska.  noftra  domLtiia,  vlilclicec  civitates  vel  oppida,  pervenerint,  ex 
tunc  veftris  fidclitatibus  prjefentibus  firmiter  committimus  et  mandamus,  ut  eofdeni 
Wadillaum  Way^iodam  ct  Ciganos  fibi  fubjcftos  omni  fine  impedimento,  ac  pertur- 
batione  aliquaK,  favere  ac  cotifervare  debeatis ;  imo  ab  omnibus  impetitionibus  feu 
offenfionibus  tueri  velitis  :  5/  autem  inter  ipfos  aliqua  Zizania  fen  pertitrbatio 
fiwenerit  ex  parte  quorumctitniue,  ex  tunc  non  iioi  nee  aliquis  alter  <vejirttm  fed 
itlem  hadijlaui  Wainoda  judieandi  et  liberandi  habeat  facultatcm.  Prxfentes 
autcm,  poft  eanim  lefturam,  femper  rcddi  jubemus  prafcntanti.  Datum  in 
Sepus  Dominica  die  ante  Feftum  St.  Georgii  Martyris.  Anno  Domini 
MCCCCXXIII.  Rcgnorura  noftrorum  anno,  Hungar.  XXXVI,  Romanor. 
vjre  XII.  Bolwmis  tcrtio. 

( I  j )     Amaro 


246 


Notes  to  the  Supplement, 


(15)     Amiiro     del     Szavo     hiil     oth<i 
Noftcr     deus      qui       cs       ibi 


opie     iindro     Cl'iiiofii     avel     fzinton 
iupcr       ill         ca-lo,      ven'iat  lan>Sum 


tro      Nav,     te       avel      tii       Lume      te     khergyol     tri       voje       fzar     andro 
tiuim  nomen,   ut     veniat    tuum  regiium    ut         fiat         tua  voluntas  ficut      in 

Cferofz         chidi     te     ph6     phu.     amfiro       mandro     ogyeufzuno      de      amcnge 
cceIo  ficque     ut     in      terra,    noftrum    pancm      quotidiunura     da      nobis 

agyefz      ertine      amenge      amaro  vitfigofz       tc       amen       kide       ertinaha 

hodie,      rcmittc      nobis       noftrum       peccatum      ut        1 

amarcnge,         palidfcha      amen      andro      dlchungalo       tfafzofz, 
noftris,  ne  inducas      nos         in  pcriculolam      horam, 

hin     c     lume 


ita      remittmuis 

tami      unkav 
fed         fume 


amen     avri     andral    6    dfchungalo      tiri 


penculo 
Amen. 


tuum 


eft 


c     lume        tin 
rcgnum     tua 


Inn       czor 
eft     potentia, 


Tom.    XIX,    p.    890.  —  Aliqui 


te        akana  -  fzekcvar. 
ut         nunc  -  femper. 

(16)  Pallas,  am  angef.  O.  S.  85.   89. 

(17)  MuRATORi     Scriptor.    rer.    Italicar. 
dicebant,  quod   erant  de  India. 

(18)  Briefe    eines    Chur  -  Braunfchweigifchen    Officiers    in    Oftindicn ;      im 
Hannovrifchen    Magaz.     Jahrg.    1785.  St.  34.  S.  531. 

(ig)     Une  Horde,    d'une  efpece    de  Bohemiens   ties  nombreux  dans  I'Inde, 

&   dont  on    ne    counoit    point    rorigine,     en  ce    qu'ils   habitent   les  forets  pour 

I'ordinaire,   &c  a  qui  meme  le  prejuge  Indien  defend  le-;  lieuv  mures,  parce  qu'ils 

jnangent,  a  ce  qu'on  dit,  toute  forte  d'animaux,    et    de    reptiles,    eut  permiffion 

d'Aydcr,  qui  eft  au-deifus  des  prejuges,  de  fuivre  I'annee,  d'y  vendre  du  lait,  du 

bois,  &  tout  CO  que  leur  induftrie  peut  leur  fournir,  ils  fe  chargerent  de  tranfporter 

partie  confiderable    de    poudre,     au   moyen     de    leurs   petites  charrettes   trainees 

ime  par    des  bufles,    qui  les  fuivent  dans    leurs    couifes  ct    voyages  continuels. 

Afin  de   les  faciliter,    une    partie    d'entre    eux    fut  affuree   d'une  folde,   comme 

pionnicrs,  &  ils   etoient  dans  les  fieges  &  dans  la  conftruftion  des  retranchemens, 

&   la  reparation  des   chemins,    de  la  plus  grande  utilite,    tant  pour  le  tranfport  des 

terres,    que  pour  la  confcftion  des  gabions  &  fafcines.     Hijloiie  d'Aydcr  Ali-Khan 

Nabob-Bahadcr.   ou  Nouveaux  Memoires  fur  I'Inde,    (a  Paris  1783,  12?)  Vol.  I. 

pag,  264.  f. 

LIST 


C   247    )• 

COMPLETE     LIST     of     AUTHORS 

Quoted   in  this  Work, 

Aelianus. 

aeneas  sylvius. 

ALMANACH  von  Ungern. 

AMMIANUS  MARCELLINUS. 

ab  ANDLERN. 

ANDREAS   PRESBYTER. 

ANQUETIL. 

ANZEIGEN  aus  den  Kaif.  Konigl.  Erbl.  1775,  1776,  1777. 

APULEJUS. 

ARNKIEL. 

AVENTIN.  '  ^ 

BALDiEUS. 

BAUR. 

BAYLE. 

BECANUS. 

BEL. 

BELLONIUS. 

BENKNER.  -  •        . 

BENKO. 

BERLINISHE  Monats  Shrift,  1783,   1784. 

BESOLDUS. 

BODLVUS. 

V.  BORN. 


•         (     248     ) 

V.  BORN^ 

BROWNSCHWEIGL.  gelehrte  Beytriige. 

BREITKOPF. 

BRESLAUER  Sammlungen. 

BRODJKVS. 

BROWNE. 

BRUCKMAN. 

BiJSCHING,  Magazin. 

Neue  Erdbefchr, 
BiJTTNER. 

CALVISIUS. 

CAMERARIUS. 

CANTEMIR,  Befchreibung  der  Moldau. 

♦  Gefchichte  des  Ofmanifchen  Reichs» 
CARERI. 
CARRA. 
CHANDLER. 
CORDOVA. 
CORNERUS. 
CROME. 
CRUSIUS. 
CUREUS.       ' 
DANISHE  MifTionsberlchte, 
DELRIO. 
DEMSHER. 

DEUTSCH. 


<     249     ) 

DEUTSCH.    iMufeum. 

DILICH. 

DURET. 

EBERHARD. 

ECCARD.  • 

FABRITIUS. 

FERGUSSON. 

FERRARIUS. 

a  FRANKENSTEIN. 

FRANZ  (Wolfg.) 

FREHER. 

FRIDVALSZKY. 

FRITSCH.  ,  . 

GAGNIER. 

GANZ  ■     ;■■ 

GEBHARDI. 

GEORGI. 

GERHARD. 

GESETZE  der  Gentoo's 

GESNER. 

GISBERT. 

GOKLENIUS. 

GRAMiVIATICA  indoft.  a  mals  vulgar,  &c, 

GR.^.VIUS. 

GRISELINI. 

K  k  GRUTIOS. 


(     ^50     ) 

GROTIUS. 
GULER. 

GULICHSCHE  Chronlk. 
HANOVRISHES   Magazin. 
HARENBERG. 

HEIDENREICH. 

HENNINIUS. 

HERBELOT. 

HERODOTUS. 

HISTOIRE  d'Ayder   Ali-Khan. 

HISTOIRE  de  Timur-Bec. 

V.  HOLBERG. 

HOTTINGER,  (Jo.  Jac.) 

HOTTINGER,  (Jo.  Heinr.) 

HUART. 

ILLIA. 

ISTHUANFFI. 

KECKERMANN, 

KELPIUS. 

KERALIO. 

KEYSLER. 

KLOCK. 

KOLBE. 

KOLLAR, 

KRANZ, 


(     25^     ) 

KRANZ. 
LAET. 

LEO   AFRICANUS.  ) 

LETTRES  edifiantes. 

LONICER. 

LUDOLPH,     Weltgefchichte. 

Hiftor.  JEth'ioY).  Commcntar. 
MAJOLUS. 

MANSI.  ,    ., 

MARSDEN. 
MATTHyEUS. 
MERSENNUS. 
MINDANUS. 
MOLTKEN. 
MORITZ.       . 
MURATORI,    Rernm  Itallcar,    Scrlptor. 

Annali   d'ltalia. 
MUNSTER. 
NETTELBLADT. 

NEUEROFFNETE  Ottomanifche  Pfortc. 
NEUHOF,       Gefandfchaft  der  Oftindifchen  Gefellfchaft  in 

den    vcreinigten    Niederlandern    an   den 

Sincfifchen  Kaifer. 
Zee  en  Lantreize  door  verfcheide  Gewefter 

van  Oftindien. 

K  k  2  NIEBUHR. 


(      252       ) 

ireibung 
Im   deutfch.  Aliif. 


NIEBUHR,      Reifebefchreibung   nach  Arablen. 


OEFELIUS.  .     . 

OLEARIUS. 

ORTELIUS.  .    ■ 

OTROKOCZl. 

PALLAS,         Samlungen  HiAorifcher  Nachrichten  iiber  die 
Mongolifchen  Volkerfchaften. 

Neue  Noidifche   Beytrage. 
PASQUIER. 
PEUCER. 
PEYSSONNEL. 

PLACE.  ,  . 

POLIT.  Journal. 
PRAY.  ,  • 

PUTEANUS. 

RASPE.  •  .  ., 

ROCCHA. 
ROGERIUS. 

LA  ROQUE.         V  .  : 

ROTTVVELSCHE   Grammatik. 
KT/DIGER,      Neuefter  Zuwachs  der — Sprachkunde 

Grundrifz  einer  Gefchichte  der  menfchlichen 
Sprache. 

SALMON. 


C     ^5?.     ) 

SALMON,       Gegenwartiger  Zuftand  desKaiferthums China. 

Staat   von  Siam. 

Gegenwartiger  Staat  des  Turkifchcn  Reichs. 

Staat  aller  Nationcti  in  Europa. 
SAMMLUNG  der  Reichs-abfchiede. 
SCERBIC.  - 

SHAW. 
SCHLOZER,   Ofmanifcher  Finanz  Etat. 

Allgemeine  Nordifche  Gefchichte» 
SCHMIDT. 
SCHUDT. 
SCHULZ. 

SCHWEDISCHE   Bibliothek..  ' 

SOBRINO,  .  '  ' 

SONNERAT. 
SPANGENBERG. 
SPONDANUS. 

SPRECHER.  : 

STEPHANOS    (Carol.) 
STUMPF.  '        ■ 

STUBEL. 
SULZER. 
SURIUS. 
SWINBURNE,  Travels  through  Spain. 

Travels  in  the  two  Sicilies. 

SZASZKYi 


C     ^54    ) 

SZASZKY. 

SZEKELY. 

SZENTIVANYo 

TENZEL. 

THEVENOT. 

THICKNESS. 

THOMASIUS. 

THUANUS. 

TOLLIUS. 

TOPPELTINUS. 

TUROCZI. 

TURKISCHER  Schauplatz, 

TWISS.  .: 

UNGRISCHES   Magazln. 

VERGILIUS.   (Polydor) 

VIDA  de    LAZARILLO  de  TORMES. 

VOETIUS. 

VOGEL. 

VOLKMANN. 

VULCANUS. 

WAGENSEIL,  Pera  llbror,  juvenillum. 

*         -*         * 

WAGNER, 
WEHNER. 

WEISSENBRUCa 

WESTPHALEN. 


(    ^55    )> 

WESTPHALEN. 
WIEGLEB. 
V.   WINDISH. 
WURSTISEN. 
V.  ZACH. 

ZEILLER,      Neue  vollftiindige  Befchrelbung  des  ganzeii. 
Konigreichs  Ungarn, 
Briefe. 


E    R    R    A    T    A„ 


Preface. 
Prto/  I .  Line  8.  for  enquires  read  enquiries 

2.  .     19.     .     brethern  •     brethren 

3.  .      18.  aher  t/jofe,  infert  ohfeyvations 

Introduction. 

xr2,     .     21.  for  becaus  read  becaufe 


6.     . 

23.     .     Valkan 

• 

Balkan 

13.     . 

22.     .    facriike  their  chil- 
dren to  their 

} 

• 

have  been  facrificed  to  their  children's 

30.    . 

12.     .    fomethimes 

• 

fometimes 

41.    . 

ig.  dele  as 

55' 

6.  dele  at 

. 

15.  for  Scalvonian 

read  Sclavonian 

66.    . 

19.     .     triviality 

idle  conceit 

67. 

3.     .     ridiculus 

ridiculous 

70. 

14,     .     throughs 

troughs 

71.    . 

ult.    .     anoy 

annoy 

72.    . 

26.27.     Sigirmvnid  Bifhop 
of  Funf  kirchen 

■ 

Bifliop  Siglfmund  at  Fiinf  kircheu 

74- 

13.     .     incendaries 

incendiaries 

75- 

.     21.     .     my 

may 

81. 

4.     .     conftraint 

reftraint 

91.    . 

.     21.     .     Hottentos 

Hottentots 

93- 

s  8.     .     Graubundten 

Country  of  the  Giifons 

100. 

ult.    .     chufe 

chofe 

103. 

1  7.  dele  as 

118. 

25.  for  apprehenfion 

» 

importation 

after  he  infert  t) 

;c 

//;/ 

orter 

122. 

5.  for  earthern 

read  earthen 

i^tS. 

25.     Crawfifli 

-• 

Crayfifli 

University  of  Caiifornia 

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388 

Return  this  material  to  the  library 

^  .^        from  which  it  was  borrowed. 

7^-*^ ~ 


D    000  722  371     2 


This  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  sUi    |||||  11    1   \  U  I 

KCD  U).jm  I     ^  ^^^^  00936'' 998 


APH  Jii 


Sr  af  CALIFORNIA 

AT 
ANGELES 
BRARY 


^ 


